OFFICIAL
RULES
2011 
EDITIONOFFICIAL BASEBALL RULES 
DIVISIONS OF THE CODE 
 1.00 Objectives of the Game, the Playing Field, Equipment. 
 2.00 Definition of Terms. 
 3.00 Game Preliminaries. 
 4.00 Starting and Ending the Game. 
 5.00 Putting the Ball in Play, Dead Ball and Live Ball (in Play). 
 6.00 The Batter. 
 7.00 The Runner. 
 8.00 The Pitcher. 
 9.00 The Umpire. 
 10.00 The Official Scorer. 
Recodified, amended and adopted by Professional Baseball Playing Rules Committee at 
New York, N.Y., December 21, 1949; amended  at New York, N.Y., February 5, 1951; 
Tampa, Fla., March 14, 1951; Chicago, Ill., March 3, 1952; New York, N.Y., November 4, 
1953; New York, N.Y., December 8, 1954; Chicago, Ill., November 20, 1956; Tampa, Fla., 
March 30-31, 1961; Tampa, Fla., November 26, 1961; New York, N.Y., January 26, 1963; 
San Diego, Calif., December 2, 1963; Houston, Tex., December 1, 1964; Columbus, Ohio., 
November 28, 1966; Pittsburgh, Pa., December 1, 1966; Mexico City, Mexico, November 
27, 1967; San Francisco, Calif., December 3, 1968; New York, N.Y., January 31, 1969; 
Fort Lauderdale, Fla., December 1, 1969; Los Angeles, Calif., November 30, 1970; 
Phoenix, Ariz., November 29, 1971; St. Petersburg, Fla., March 23, 1972; Honolulu, 
Hawaii, November 27, 1972; Houston, Tex., December 3 and 7, 1973; New Orleans, La., 
December 2, 1974; Hollywood, Fla., December 8, 1975; Los Angeles, Calif., December 6, 
1976; Honolulu, Hawaii, December 5, 1977; Orlando, Fla., December 4, 1978; Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada, December 3, 1979; Dallas, Tex., December 8, 1980; Hollywood, Fla., 
December 7, 1981; Honolulu, Hawaii, December 5, 1982; Nashville, Tenn., December 5, 
1983; New York, N.Y., January 8, 1985; New York, N.Y., March 27, 1986; Hollywood, 
Fla., December 9, 1986; New York, N.Y., November 23, 1987; New York, N.Y., January 
26, 1989; Chicago, Ill., December 3, 1990; Miami, Fla., December 5, 1991; Louisville, Ky., 
December 4, 1992; Atlanta, Ga., December 12, 1993; New York, N.Y., January 30, 1996; 
Mail vote, January 2006; Teleconference, December 20, 2006; Teleconference, February 5, 
2008; Las Vegas, Nev., December 9, 2008; Teleconference, May 26, 2009; Teleconference, 
January 25, 2010; Lake Buena Vista, Fla., December 8, 2010; Teleconference, February 16, 
2011. ii
Foreword 
This code of rules governs the playing of baseball games by professional teams of Major 
League Baseball and the leagues that are members of the National Association of 
Professional Baseball Leagues. 
We recognize that many amateur and non-professional organizations play their games under 
professional rules and we are happy to make our rules available as widely as possible.  It is 
well to remember that specifications as to fields, equipment, etc., may be modified to meet 
the needs of each group. 
Money fines, long-term suspensions and similar penalties imposed by this code are not 
practicable for amateur groups, but officers and umpires of such organizations should insist 
on strict observance of all the rules governing the playing of the game. 
Baseball not only has maintained its position as the National Game of the United States, but 
also has become an International Game being played in more than 100 countries.  The 
popularity of the game will grow only so long as its players, managers, coaches, umpires 
and administrative officers respect the discipline of its code of rules. 
PLAYING RULES COMMITTEE  
Sandy Alderson, Chair Brian Gorman John Schuerholz 
Bob Beban John McHale, Jr. Jimmie Lee Solomon 
Rod Carew Terry Ryan Bill Stoneman 
Amateur baseball advisory member: Mike Gaski 
© 2011 by the Commissioner of Baseball.  All rights reserved. 
No part of the Official Baseball Rules may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic 
or mechanical, including photocopy, recording or any information storage and retrieval system now known or to 
be invented, without permission in writing from the Office of the Commissioner of Baseball. 
The Major League Baseball silhouetted batted logo is a registered trademark of Major League Baseball 
Properties, Inc. 
Cover photo by Jeff Gross/Getty Images.  © 2010 by Getty Images. iii
IMPORTANT NOTE
The Playing Rules Committee, at its December 1977 meeting, voted to incorporate the 
Notes/Case Book/Comments section directly into the Official Baseball Rules at the 
appropriate places.  Basically, the Case Book interprets or elaborates on the basic rules and 
in essence have the same effect as rules when applied to particular sections for which they 
are intended. 
This arrangement is designed to give quicker access to any written language pertaining to an 
Official Rule and does not require a reader to refer to different sections of the Official 
Baseball Rules book in considering the application of a particular rule. 
Case Book material is printed in smaller type than the rule language and is labeled as 
Comment. iv
The Playing Rules Committee made the following changes that will be in effect for the 
2011 season:
 Reorganized the phrasing of Rule 2.00 (Catch). 
 Clarified the definition of Tag (Rule 2.00 (Tag)). 
 Clarified the circumstances in which interference in Rule 3.15 applies, made 
stylistic revisions, moved a Note to the Rule 3.15 Comment and revised the Play in 
Rule 3.15 Comment. 
 Corrected a cross-reference in Rule 4.01 Comment. 
 Added interference with a batted ball to the list of circumstances causing a batter to 
be declared out.  (Rule 6.05(o)) 
 Added interference with a thrown ball to the list of circumstances causing a runner 
to be declared out.  (Rule 7.08(l)) 
 Clarified remedies for interference with a batted or thrown ball and made stylistic 
changes.  (Rule 7.11) 
 Clarified the rule allowing a pitcher to touch his mouth or lips on mound. (Rule 
8.02(a)(1)) 
 Made a stylistic revision in Rule 8.02(c). 
 Revised comment on intentionally pitching at a batter to prohibit arguing a decision 
by the umpire to issue a warning.  (Rule 8.02(d) Comment) 
The first paragraph of Rule 8.02(d) Comment shall apply in the Major Leagues for the 
2011 season only. 
 In addition, the index has been revised. Rule 1.01 to 1.04 
1
1.00—Objectives of the Game. 
1.01 Baseball is a game between two teams of nine players each, under direction of a 
manager, played on an enclosed field in accordance with these rules, under jurisdiction of 
one or more umpires. 
1.02  The objective of each team is to win by scoring more runs than the opponent. 
1.03 The winner of the game shall be that team which shall have scored, in accordance 
with these rules, the greater number of runs at the conclusion of a regulation game. 
1.04 THE PLAYING FIELD. The field shall be laid out according to the instructions 
below, supplemented by Diagrams No. 1, No. 2 and No. 3 on adjoining pages. 
 The infield shall be a 90-foot square.  The outfield shall be the area between two 
foul lines formed by extending two sides of the square, as in Diagram 1.  The distance from 
home base to the nearest fence, stand or other obstruction on fair territory shall be 250 feet 
or more.  A distance of 320 feet or more along the foul lines, and 400 feet or more to center 
field is preferable.  The infield shall be graded so that the base lines and home plate are 
level.  The pitcher’s plate shall be 10 inches above the level of home plate.  The degree of 
slope from a point 6 inches in front of the pitcher’s plate to a point 6 feet toward home plate 
shall be 1 inch to 1 foot, and such degree of slope shall be uniform.  The infield and outfield, 
including the boundary lines, are fair territory and all other area is foul territory. 
 It is desirable that the line from home base through the pitchers plate to second base 
shall run East-Northeast. 
 It is recommended that the distance from home base to the backstop, and from the 
base lines to the nearest fence, stand or other obstruction on foul territory shall be 60 feet or 
more.  See Diagram 1. 
 When location of home base is determined, with a steel tape measure 127 feet, 3?
inches in desired direction to establish second base.  From home base, measure 90 feet 
toward first base; from second base, measure 90 feet toward first base; the intersection of 
these lines establishes first base.  From home base, measure 90 feet toward third base; from 
second base, measure 90 feet toward third base; the intersection of these lines establishes 
third base.  The distance between first base and third base is 127 feet, 3? inches.  All 
measurements from home base shall be taken from the point where the first and third base 
lines intersect. 
 The catcher’s box, the batters’ boxes, the coaches’ boxes, the three-foot first base 
lines and the next batter’s boxes shall be laid out as shown in Diagrams 1 and 2. Rule 1.04 to 1.07 
2
 The foul lines and all other playing lines indicated in the diagrams by solid black 
lines shall be marked with paint or non-toxic and non-burning chalk or other white material. 
 The grass lines and dimensions shown on the diagrams are those used in many 
fields, but they are not mandatory and each club shall determine the size and shape of the 
grassed and bare areas of its playing field. 
 NOTE: (a) Any Playing Field constructed by a professional club after June 1, 
1958, shall provide a minimum distance of 325 feet from home 
base to the nearest fence, stand or other obstruction on the right and 
left field foul lines, and a minimum distance of 400 feet to the 
center field fence. 
   (b) No existing playing field shall be remodeled after June 1, 1958, in 
such manner as to reduce the distance from home base to the foul 
poles and to the center field fence below the minimum specified in 
paragraph (a) above. 
1.05 Home base shall be marked by a five-sided slab of whitened rubber.  It shall be a 
17-inch square with two of the corners removed so that one edge is 17 inches long, two 
adjacent sides are 8½ inches and the remaining two sides are 12 inches and set at an angle to 
make a point.  It shall be set in the ground with the point at the intersection of the lines 
extending from home base to first base and to third base; with the 17-inch edge facing the 
pitcher’s plate, and the two 12-inch edges coinciding with the first and third base lines.  The 
top edges of home base shall be beveled and the base shall be fixed in the ground level with 
the ground surface. (See drawing D in Diagram 2.) 
1.06 First, second and third bases shall be marked by white canvas or rubber-covered 
bags, securely attached to the ground as indicated in Diagram 2.  The first and third base 
bags shall be entirely within the infield.  The second base bag shall be centered on second 
base.  The bags shall be 15 inches square, not less than three nor more than five inches 
thick, and filled with soft material. 
1.07 The pitcher’s plate shall be a rectangular slab of whitened rubber, 24 inches by 6 
inches.  It shall be set in the ground as shown in Diagrams 1 and 2, so that the distance 
between the pitcher’s plate and home base (the rear point of home plate) shall be 60 feet, 6 
inches. 3
GRASS LINE
BACKSTOP
5' CIRCLE  5' CIRCLE 
RADIUS FROM 
HOME BASE 
60'    
37'  37' 
60'6" 
1' MIN
10’ MAX 
1' MIN
10’ MAX 
13' 13' 
6' 
13' 
20' 
15' 
45'-0" 
6' 
45'-0" 
90' 0" 
90' 0" 
FOUL LINE
FOUL LINE
95' RADIUS 
NEXT BATTER'S BOX
NEXT BATTER'S BOX      
LEGEND
BATTER'S BOX, 
CATCHER'S BOX, FOUL LINE, 
PITCHER'S PLATE, COACH'S BOX
BASE LINES
26' CIRCLE
127-3 3/8"
127-3 3/8"
18' CIRCLE
NEXT BATTER'S BOX
COACH'S
BOX
COACH'S
BOX
GRANDSTAND OR FENCE 60' FROM BASE
OR FOUL LINE
3' 
DIAGRAM NO. 1
GRASS LINES
3'  3' 4
LAYOUT AT 
SECOND BASE
LAYOUT AT 
THIRD BASE
FOUL LINE
DIAGRAM NO. 2
LEGEND
1st, 2nd, 3rd BASES
BATTER'S BOX
CATCHER'S BOX
HOME BASE
PITCHER'S PLATE
A
A
15"
15"
90
90
LAYOUT AT 
FIRST BASE
FOUL LINE
90
A
90
6" 6" 17"
B
D
C
B
4'0"
43"
3'0"
8'0"
4'0"
LAYOUT AT HOME BASE
LAYOUT AT PITCHER'S PLATE
SEE DIAGRAM NO. 3
E
"
8
1
2
"
8
1
2
3'0"
A
B
C
D
E
         5
DIAGRAM NO. 3        
Suggested Layout of Pitching Mound
Pitching Mound:   An 18' diameter circle, 
center of which is 59' from back of home plate.
Locate front edge of rubber 18" behind
center of mound.
Front edge of rubber to back point 
of home plate, 60'6".
Slope starts 6" from front edge of rubber.
The degree of slope from a starting 
point 6" in front of the pitcher's plate to 
a point 6' toward home plate shall 
be 1" to 1', and such degree of slope 
shall be uniform.
Level area surrounding rubber should be 6"
in front of rubber, 18" to each side and 22" 
to rear of rubber. Total level area 5' x 34".
This Diagram No. 3 supplements and, in cases of difference, supersedes Diagram No. 2. 
9'
6'
5'
4'
3'
2'
9'
1" 1'
LEVEL AREA  
SHADED 5'
1"
1"
1"
1"
1"
34" 2'
18"
6"
18"
10'
REAR SLOPE 
GRADUAL TO CIRCLE EDGERule 1.08 to 1.10 
6
1.08 The home club shall furnish players’ benches, one each for the home and visiting 
teams.  Such benches shall not be less than twenty-five feet from the base lines. They shall 
be roofed and shall be enclosed at the back and ends. 
1.09 The ball shall be a sphere formed by yarn wound around a small core of cork, 
rubber or similar material, covered with two strips of white horsehide or cowhide, tightly 
stitched together.  It shall weigh not less than five nor more than 5¼ ounces avoirdupois and 
measure not less than nine nor more than 9¼ inches in circumference. 
1.10  
(a) The bat shall be a smooth, round stick not more than 2.61 inches in diameter at the 
thickest part and not more than 42 inches in length.  The bat shall be one piece of 
solid wood. 
 NOTE: No laminated or experimental bats shall be used in a professional game 
(either championship season or exhibition games) until the manufacturer has 
secured approval from the Rules Committee of his design and methods of 
manufacture. 
(b) Cupped Bats.  An indentation in the end of the bat up to one inch in depth is 
permitted and may be no wider than two inches and no less than one inch in 
diameter.  The indentation must be free of right angles and may not contain any 
foreign substance. 
(c) The bat handle, for not more than 18 inches from its end, may be covered or treated 
with any material or substance to improve the grip.  Any such material or substance 
that extends past the 18-inch limitation shall cause the bat to be removed from the 
game. 
 NOTE: If the umpire discovers that the bat does not conform to (c) above until a 
time during or after which the bat has been used in play, it shall not be grounds for 
declaring the batter out, or ejected from the game. 
 Rule 1.10(c) Comment:  If pine tar extends past the 18-inch limitation, then the umpire, on his 
own initiative or if alerted by the opposing team, shall order the batter to use a different bat.  The 
batter may use the bat later in the game only if the excess substance is removed.  If no objections are 
raised prior to a bat’s use, then a violation of Rule 1.10(c) on that play does not nullify any action or 
play on the field and no protests of such play shall be allowed. 
(d) No colored bat may be used in a professional game unless approved by the Rules 
Committee. Rule 1.11 
7
1.11  
(a) (1) All players on a team shall wear uniforms identical in color, trim and style, 
and all players uniforms shall include minimal six-inch numbers on their 
backs.  
(2) Any part of an undershirt exposed to view shall be of a uniform solid color for 
all players on a team.  Any player other than the pitcher may have numbers, 
letters, insignia attached to the sleeve of the undershirt. 
(3) No player whose uniform does not conform to that of his teammates shall be 
permitted to participate in a game. 
(b) A league may provide that 
 (1) each team shall wear a distinctive uniform at all times, or 
(2) that each team shall have two sets of uniforms, white for home games and a 
different color for road games. 
(c) (1) Sleeve lengths may vary for individual players, but the sleeves of each 
individual player shall be approximately the same length.  
(2) No player shall wear ragged, frayed or slit sleeves. 
(d) No player shall attach to his uniform tape or other material of a different color from 
his uniform. 
(e) No part of the uniform shall include a pattern that imitates or suggests the shape of a 
baseball. 
(f) Glass buttons and polished metal shall not be used on a uniform. 
(g) No player shall attach anything to the heel or toe of his shoe other than the ordinary 
shoe plate or toe plate.  Shoes with pointed spikes similar to golf or track shoes shall 
not be worn. 
(h) No part of the uniform shall include  patches or designs relating to commercial 
advertisements. 
(i) A league may provide that the uniforms of its member teams include the names of 
its players on their backs.  Any name other than the last name of the player must be Rule 1.11 to 1.14 
8
approved by the League President.  If adopted, all uniforms for a team must have 
the names of its players. 
1.12 The catcher may wear a leather mitt not more than thirty-eight inches in 
circumference, nor more than fifteen and one-half inches from top to bottom. Such limits 
shall include all lacing and any leather band or facing attached to the outer edge of the mitt. 
The space between the thumb section and the finger section of the mitt shall not exceed six 
inches at the top of the mitt and four inches at the base of the thumb crotch.  The web shall 
measure not more than seven inches across the top or more than six inches from its top to 
the base of the thumb crotch.  The web may be either a lacing or lacing through leather 
tunnels, or a center piece of leather which may be an extension of the palm, connected to the 
mitt with lacing and constructed so that it will not exceed any of the above mentioned 
measurements. 
1.13 The first baseman may wear a leather glove or mitt not more than twelve inches 
long from top to bottom and not more than eight inches wide across the palm, measured 
from the base of the thumb crotch to the outer edge of the mitt.  The space between the 
thumb section and the finger section of the mitt shall not exceed four inches at the top of the 
mitt and three and one-half inches at the base of the thumb crotch.  The mitt shall be 
constructed so that this space is permanently fixed and cannot be enlarged, extended, 
widened, or deepened by the use of any materials or process whatever.  The web of the mitt 
shall measure not more than five inches from its top to the base of the thumb crotch.  The 
web may be either a lacing, lacing through leather tunnels, or a center piece of leather which 
may be an extension of the palm connected to the mitt with lacing and constructed so that it 
will not exceed the above mentioned measurements.  The webbing shall not be constructed 
of wound or wrapped lacing or deepened to make a net type of trap.  The glove may be of 
any weight. 
1.14 Each fielder, other than the first baseman or catcher, may use or wear a leather 
glove.  The measurements covering size of glove shall be made by measuring front side or 
ball receiving side of glove.  The tool or measuring tape shall be placed to contact the 
surface or feature of item being measured and follow all contours in the process. The glove 
shall not measure more than 12" from the tip of any one of the 4 fingers, through the ball 
pocket to the bottom edge or heel of glove.  The glove shall not measure more than 7¾" 
wide, measured from the inside seam at base of first finger, along base of other fingers, to 
the outside edge of little finger edge of glove.  The space or area between the thumb and 
first finger, called crotch, may be filled with leather webbing or back stop.  The webbing 
may be constructed of two plies of standard leather to close the crotch area entirely, or it Rule 1.14 to 1.16 
9
may be constructed of a series of tunnels made of leather, or a series of panels of leather, or 
of lacing leather thongs.  The webbing may not be constructed of wound or wrapped lacing 
to make a net type of trap.  When webbing is made to cover entire crotch area, the webbing 
can be constructed so as to be flexible.  When constructed of a series of sections, they must 
be joined together.  These sections may not be so constructed to allow depression to be 
developed by curvatures in the section sides.  The webbing shall be made to control the size 
of the crotch opening.  The crotch opening shall measure not more than 4½" at the top, not 
more than 5¾" deep, and shall be 3½" wide at its bottom.  The opening of crotch shall not 
be more than 4½" at any point below its top.  The webbing shall be secured at each side, and 
at top and bottom of crotch.  The attachment is to be made with leather lacing, these 
connections to be secured.  If they stretch or become loose, they shall be adjusted to their 
proper condition.  The glove can be of any weight.  See Diagram No. 4. 
1.15   
(a) The pitcher’s glove may not, exclusive of piping, be white, gray, nor, in the 
judgment of an umpire, distracting in any manner. 
(b) No pitcher shall attach to his glove any foreign material of a color different from the 
glove. 
(c) The umpire-in-chief shall cause a glove that violates Rules 1.15(a) or 1.15(b) to be 
removed from the game, either on his own initiative, at the recommendation of 
another umpire or upon complaint of the opposing manager that the umpire-in-chief 
agrees has merit. 
1.16 A Professional League shall adopt the following rule pertaining to the use of 
helmets: 
(a) All players shall use some type of protective helmet while at bat and while running 
the bases. 
(b) All players in National Association Leagues shall wear a double ear-flap helmet 
while at bat. 
(c) All Major League players must wear a single ear-flap helmet (or at the player’s 
option, a double ear-flap helmet). 
(d) All catchers shall wear a catcher’s protective helmet, while fielding their position. 
(e) All base coaches shall wear a protective helmet while performing their duties. 10 
  
H
H
Palm width—7
Palm width—8"
Top opening of web—4
(webbing not to be wider 
than 4     at any point)
Bottom opening of web—3
Web top to bottom—5
1st finger crotch seam—5
Thumb crotch seam—5
G        
F        
E        
C
H
H
I
B
A
J K L M
H
3
/ "4
1
/ "2   
1
/ "2   
1
/ "2   
1
/ "2   
1
/ "2   
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
(E)
(F)
(G)
Crotch seam—13
Thumb top to bottom edge—7
1st finger top to bottom edge—12"
2nd finger top to bottom edge—11
3rd finger top to bottom edge—10
4th finger to bottom edge—9"
(H)
(I)
(J)
(K)
(L)
(M)
D        
3
/ "4
3
/ "4
3
/ "4
3
/ "4
3
/ "4
DIAGRAM NO. 4Rule 1.16 to 1.17 
11 
  
(f) All bat/ball boys or girls shall wear a double ear-flap protective helmet while 
performing their duties. 
 Rule 1.16 Comment:  If the umpire observes any violation of these rules, he shall direct the 
violation to be corrected.  If the violation is not corrected within a reasonable time, in the umpire’s 
judgment, the umpire shall eject the offender from the game, and disciplinary action, as appropriate, will 
be recommended. 
1.17 Playing equipment including but not limited to the bases, pitcher’s plate, baseball, 
bats, uniforms, catcher’s mitts, first baseman’s gloves, infielders and outfielders gloves and 
protective helmets, as detailed in the provisions of this rule, shall not contain any undue 
commercialization of the product.  Designations by the manufacturer on any such 
equipment must be in good taste as to the size and content of the manufacturer’s logo or the 
brand name of the item.  The provisions of this Section 1.17 shall apply to professional 
leagues only. 
 NOTE: Manufacturers who plan innovative changes in baseball equipment for 
professional baseball leagues should submit same to the Official Playing Rules 
Committee prior to production. Rule 2.00 
12 
2.00—Definitions of Terms.
(All definitions in Rule 2.00 are listed alphabetically.)
 ADJUDGED is a judgment decision by the umpire. 
 An APPEAL is the act of a fielder in claiming violation of the rules by the offensive 
team. 
 A BALK is an illegal act by the pitcher with a runner or runners on base, entitling 
all runners to advance one base. 
 A BALL is a pitch which does not enter the strike zone in flight and is not struck at 
by the batter. 
 Rule 2.00 (Ball) Comment:  If the pitch touches the ground and bounces through the strike zone it 
is a “ball.”  If such a pitch touches the batter, he shall be awarded first base.  If the batter swings at such a 
pitch after two strikes, the ball cannot be caught, for the purposes of Rule 6.05 (c) and 6.09 (b).  If the 
batter hits such a pitch, the ensuing action shall be the same as if he hit the ball in flight. 
 A BASE is one of four points which must be touched by a runner in order to score a 
run; more usually applied to the canvas bags and the rubber plate which mark the base 
points. 
 A BASE COACH is a team member in uniform who is stationed in the coach’s box 
at first or third base to direct the batter and the runners. 
 A BASE ON BALLS is an award of first base granted to a batter who, during his 
time at bat, receives four pitches outside the strike zone. 
 A BATTER is an offensive player who takes his position in the batter’s box. 
 BATTER-RUNNER is a term that identifies the offensive player who has just 
finished his time at bat until he is put out or until the play on which he became a runner 
ends. 
 The BATTER’S BOX is the area within which the batter shall stand during his time 
at bat. Rule 2.00 
13 
 The BATTERY is the pitcher and catcher. 
 BENCH OR DUGOUT is the seating facilities reserved for players, substitutes and 
other team members in uniform when they are not actively engaged on the playing field. 
 A BUNT is a batted ball not swung at, but intentionally met with the bat and tapped 
slowly within the infield. 
 A CALLED GAME is one in which, for any reason, the umpire-in-chief terminates 
play. 
 A CATCH is the act of a fielder in getting secure possession in his hand or glove of 
a ball in flight and firmly holding it; providing he does not use his cap, protector, pocket or 
any other part of his uniform in getting possession.  It is not a catch, however, if 
simultaneously or immediately following his contact with the ball, he collides with a player, 
or with a wall, or if he falls down, and as a result of such collision or falling, drops the ball. 
It is not a catch if a fielder touches a fly ball which then hits a member of the offensive team 
or an umpire and then is caught by another defensive player.  In establishing the validity of 
the catch, the fielder shall hold the ball long enough to prove that he has complete control of 
the ball and that his release of the ball is voluntary and intentional.  If the fielder has made 
the catch and drops the ball while in the act of making a throw following the catch, the ball 
shall be adjudged to have been caught.   
 Rule 2.00 (Catch) Comment:  A catch is legal if the ball is finally held by any fielder, even though 
juggled, or held by another fielder before it touches the ground.  Runners may leave their bases the 
instant the first fielder touches the ball.  A fielder may reach over a fence, railing, rope or other line of 
demarcation to make a catch.  He may jump on top of a railing, or canvas that may be in foul ground. No 
interference should be allowed when a fielder reaches over a fence, railing, rope or into a stand to catch a 
ball.  He does so at his own risk. 
 If a fielder, attempting a catch at the edge of the dugout, is “held up” and kept from an apparent 
fall by a player or players of either team and the catch is made, it shall be allowed. 
 The CATCHER is the fielder who takes his position back of the home base. 
 The CATCHER’S BOX is that area within which the catcher shall stand until the 
pitcher delivers the ball. Rule 2.00 
14 
 THE CLUB is a person or group of persons responsible for assembling the team 
personnel, providing the playing field and required facilities, and representing the team in 
relations with the league. 
 A COACH is a team member in uniform appointed by the manager to perform such 
duties as the manager may designate, such as but not limited to acting as base coach. 
 A DEAD BALL is a ball out of play because of a legally created temporary 
suspension of play. 
 The DEFENSE (or DEFENSIVE) is the team, or any player of the team, in the 
field. 
 A DOUBLE-HEADER is two regularly scheduled or rescheduled games, played in 
immediate succession. 
 A DOUBLE PLAY is a play by the defense in which two offensive players are put 
out as a result of continuous action, providing there is no error between putouts. 
 (a) A force double play is one in which both putouts are force plays. 
 (b) A reverse force double play is one in which the first out is a force play and the 
second out is made on a runner for whom the force is removed by reason of 
the first out.  Examples of reverse force plays: runner on first, one out; batter 
grounds to first baseman, who steps on first base (one out) and throws to 
second baseman or shortstop for the second out (a tag play). 
  Another example:  bases loaded, none out; batter grounds to third baseman, 
who steps on third base (one out); then throws to catcher for the second out 
(tag play). 
 DUGOUT (See definition of BENCH) 
 A FAIR BALL is a batted ball that settles on fair ground between home and first 
base, or between home and third base, or that is on or over fair territory when bounding to 
the outfield past first or third base, or that touches first, second or third base, or that first 
falls on fair territory on or beyond first base or third base, or that, while on or over fair Rule 2.00 
15 
territory touches the person of an umpire or player, or that, while over fair territory, passes 
out of the playing field in flight. 
 A fair fly shall be judged according to the relative position of the ball and the foul 
line, including the foul pole, and not as to whether the fielder is on fair or foul territory at 
the time he touches the ball. 
 Rule 2.00 (Fair Ball) Comment:  If a fly ball lands in the infield between home and first base, or 
home and third base, and then bounces to foul territory without touching a player or umpire and before 
passing first or third base, it is a foul ball; or if the ball settles on foul territory or is touched by a player 
on foul territory, it is a foul ball.  If a fly ball lands on or beyond first or third base and then bounces to 
foul territory, it is a fair hit. 
 Clubs, increasingly, are erecting tall foul poles at the fence line with a wire netting extending along 
the side of the pole on fair territory above the fence to enable the umpires more accurately to judge fair 
and foul balls. 
 FAIR TERRITORY is that part of the playing field within, and including the first 
base and third base lines, from home base to the bottom of the playing field fence and 
perpendicularly upwards. All foul lines are in fair territory. 
 A FIELDER is any defensive player. 
 FIELDER’S CHOICE is the act of a fielder who handles a fair grounder and, 
instead of throwing to first base to put out the batter-runner, throws to another base in an 
attempt to put out a preceding runner.  The term is also used by scorers (a) to account for the 
advance of the batter-runner who takes one or more extra bases when the fielder who 
handles his safe hit attempts to put out a preceding runner; (b) to account for the advance of 
a runner (other than by stolen base or error) while a fielder is attempting to put out another 
runner; and (c) to account for the advance of a runner made solely because of the defensive 
team’s indifference (undefended steal). 
 A FLY BALL is a batted ball that goes high in the air in flight. 
 A FORCE PLAY is a play in which a runner legally loses his right to occupy a base 
by reason of the batter becoming a runner. 
 Rule 2.00 (Force Play) Comment:  Confusion regarding this play is removed by remembering that 
frequently the “force” situation is removed during the play.  Example:  Man on first, one out, ball hit 
sharply to first baseman who touches the bag and batter-runner is out.  The force is removed at that 
moment and runner advancing to second must be tagged.  If there had been a runner on third or second, 
and either of these runners scored before the tag-out at second, the run counts.  Had the first baseman Rule 2.00 
16 
thrown to second and the ball then had been returned to first, the play at second was a force out, making 
two outs, and the return throw to first ahead of the runner would have made three outs.  In that case, no 
run would score. 
 Example:  Not a force out.  One out.  Runner on first and third.  Batter flies out.  Two out.  Runner 
on third tags up and scores.  Runner on first tries to retouch before throw from fielder reaches first 
baseman, but does not get back in time and is out.  Three outs.  If, in umpire’s judgment, the runner from 
third touched home before the ball was held at first base, the run counts. 
 A FORFEITED GAME is a game declared ended by the umpire-in-chief in favor of 
the offended team by the score of 9 to 0, for violation of the rules. 
 A FOUL BALL is a batted ball that settles on foul territory between home and first 
base, or between home and third base, or that bounds past first or third base on or over foul 
territory, or that first falls on foul territory beyond first or third base, or that, while on or 
over foul territory, touches the person of an umpire or player, or any object foreign to the 
natural ground. 
 A foul fly shall be judged according to the relative position of the ball and the foul 
line, including the foul pole, and not as to whether the infielder is on foul or fair territory at 
the time he touches the ball. 
 Rule 2.00 (Foul Ball) Comment:  A batted ball not touched by a fielder, which hits the pitcher’s 
rubber and rebounds into foul territory, between home and first, or between home and third base is a 
foul ball. 
 FOUL TERRITORY is that part of the playing field outside the first and third base 
lines extended to the fence and perpendicularly upwards. 
 A FOUL TIP is a batted ball that goes sharp and direct from the bat to the catcher’s 
hands and is legally caught.  It is not a foul tip unless caught and any foul tip that is caught 
is a strike, and the ball is in play. It is not a catch if it is a rebound, unless the ball has first 
touched the catcher’s glove or hand. 
 A GROUND BALL is a batted ball that rolls or bounces close to the ground. 
 The HOME TEAM is the team on whose grounds the game is played, or if the 
game is played on neutral grounds, the home team shall be designated by mutual agreement. 
 ILLEGAL (or ILLEGALLY) is contrary to these rules. Rule 2.00 
17 
 An ILLEGAL PITCH is (1) a pitch delivered to the batter when the pitcher does not 
have his pivot foot in contact with the pitcher’s plate; (2) a quick return pitch.  An illegal 
pitch when runners are on base is a balk. 
 An INFIELDER is a fielder who occupies a position in the infield. 
 An INFIELD FLY is a fair fly ball (not including a line drive nor an attempted 
bunt) which can be caught by an infielder with ordinary effort, when first and second, or 
first, second and third bases are occupied, before two are out.  The pitcher, catcher and any 
outfielder who stations himself in the infield on the play shall be considered infielders for 
the purpose of this rule. 
 When it seems apparent that a batted ball will be an Infield Fly, the umpire shall 
immediately declare “Infield Fly” for the benefit of the runners.  If the ball is near the 
baselines, the umpire shall declare “Infield Fly, if Fair.” 
 The ball is alive and runners may advance at the risk of the ball being caught, or 
retouch and advance after the ball is touched, the same as on any fly ball. If the hit becomes 
a foul ball, it is treated the same as any foul. 
 If a declared Infield Fly is allowed to fall untouched to the ground, and bounces foul 
before passing first or third base, it is a foul ball.  If a declared Infield Fly falls untouched to 
the ground outside the baseline, and bounces fair before passing first or third base, it is an 
Infield Fly. 
 Rule 2.00 (Infield Fly) Comment:  On the infield fly rule the umpire is to rule whether the ball 
could ordinarily have been handled by an infielder—not by some arbitrary limitation such as the grass, or 
the base lines.  The umpire must rule also that a ball is an infield fly, even if handled by an outfielder, if, 
in the umpire’s judgment, the ball could have been as easily handled by an infielder.  The infield fly is in 
no sense to be considered an appeal play.  The umpire’s judgment must govern, and the decision should 
be made immediately. 
 When an infield fly rule is called, runners may advance at their own risk.  If on an infield fly rule, 
the infielder intentionally drops a fair ball, the ball remains in play despite the provisions of Rule 6.05(l). 
The infield fly rule takes precedence. 
 IN FLIGHT describes a batted, thrown, or pitched ball which has not yet touched 
the ground or some object other than a fielder. 
 IN JEOPARDY is a term indicating that the ball is in play and an offensive player 
may be put out. Rule 2.00 
18 
 An INNING is that portion of a game within which the teams alternate on offense 
and defense and in which there are three putouts for each team. Each team’s time at bat is a 
half-inning. 
 INTERFERENCE 
 (a) Offensive interference is an act by the team at bat which interferes with, 
obstructs, impedes, hinders or confuses any fielder attempting to make a play.  
If the umpire declares the batter, batter-runner, or a runner out for interference, 
all other runners shall return to the last base that was in the judgment of the 
umpire, legally touched at the time  of the interference, unless otherwise 
provided by these rules. 
 Rule 2.00 (Interference (a)) Comment:  In the event the batter-runner has not reached first base, all 
runners shall return to the base last occupied at the time of the pitch. 
 (b) Defensive interference is an act by a fielder that hinders or prevents a batter 
from hitting a pitch. 
 (c) Umpire’s interference occurs (1) when a plate umpire hinders, impedes or 
prevents a catcher’s throw attempting to prevent a stolen base or retire a 
runner on a pick-off play, or (2) when a fair ball touches an umpire on fair 
territory before passing a fielder. 
 Rule 2.00 (Interference (c)) Comment: Umpire interference may also occur when an umpire 
interferes with a catcher returning the ball to the pitcher. 
 (d) Spectator interference occurs when a spectator reaches out of the stands, or 
goes on the playing field, and (1) touches a live ball or (2) touches a player 
and hinders an attempt to make a play on a live ball. 
 On any interference the ball is dead. 
 THE LEAGUE is a group of clubs whose teams play each other in a pre-arranged 
schedule under these rules for the league championship. 
 THE LEAGUE PRESIDENT is the league official charged with enforcing these 
Rules, fining or suspending any player, manager, coach or umpire for violation of these 
Rules, resolving any disputes involving these Rules or determining any protested games. Rule 2.00 
19 
 Rule 2.00 (League President) Comment:  With respect to the Major Leagues, the functions of the 
League President pursuant to these Rules shall be carried out by the designees of the Commissioner of 
Baseball.  The Commissioner may designate different officials to carry out different functions of a 
League President pursuant to these Rules. 
 LEGAL (or LEGALLY) is in accordance with these rules. 
 A LIVE BALL is a ball which is in play. 
 A LINE DRIVE is a batted ball that goes sharp and direct from the bat to a fielder 
without touching the ground. 
 THE MANAGER is a person appointed by the club to be responsible for the team’s 
actions on the field, and to represent the team in communications with the umpire and the 
opposing team.  A player may be appointed manager. 
 (a) The club shall designate the manager to the league president or the 
umpire-in-chief not less than thirty minutes before the scheduled starting time 
of the game. 
 (b) The manager may advise the umpire-in-chief that he has delegated specific 
duties prescribed by the rules to a player or coach, and any action of such 
designated representative shall be official.  The manager shall always be 
responsible for his team’s conduct, observance of the official rules, and 
deference to the umpires. 
 (c) If a manager leaves the field, he shall designate a player or coach as his 
substitute, and such substitute manager shall have the duties, rights and 
responsibilities of the manager.  If the manager fails or refuses to designate his 
substitute before leaving, the umpire-in-chief shall designate a team member 
as substitute manager. 
 OBSTRUCTION is the act of a fielder who, while not in possession of the ball and 
not in the act of fielding the ball, impedes the progress of any runner. 
 Rule 2.00 (Obstruction) Comment:  If a fielder is about to receive a thrown ball and if the ball is in 
flight directly toward and near enough to the fielder so he must occupy his position to receive the ball he 
may be considered “in the act of fielding a ball.”  It is entirely up to the judgment of the umpire as to 
whether a fielder is in the act of fielding a ball.  After a fielder has made an attempt to field a ball and 
missed, he can no longer be in the “act of fielding” the ball.  For example: an infielder dives at a ground Rule 2.00 
20 
ball and the ball passes him and he continues to lie on the ground and delays the progress of the runner, 
he very likely has obstructed the runner. 
 OFFENSE is the team, or any player of the team, at bat. 
 OFFICIAL SCORER. See Rule 10.00. 
ORDINARY EFFORT is the effort that a fielder of average skill at a position in 
that league or classification of leagues should exhibit on a play, with due consideration 
given to the condition of the field and weather conditions. 
 Rule 2.00 (Ordinary Effort) Comment:  This standard, called for several times in the Official 
Scoring Rules (e.g., Rules 10.05(a)(3), 10.05(a)(4), 10.05(a)(6), 10.05(b)(3) (Base Hits); 10.08(b) 
(Sacrifices); 10.12(a)(1) Comment, 10.12(d)(2) (Errors); and 10.13(a), 10.13(b) (Wild Pitches and 
Passed Balls)) and in the Official Baseball Rules (e.g., Rule 2.00 (Infield Fly)), is an objective 
standard in regard to any particular fielder.  In other words, even if a fielder makes his best effort, if 
that effort falls short of what an average fielder at that position in that league would have made in a 
situation, the official scorer should charge that fielder with an error.  
 An OUT is one of the three required retirements of an offensive team during its time 
at bat. 
 An OUTFIELDER is a fielder who occupies a position in the outfield, which is the 
area of the playing field most distant from home base. 
 OVERSLIDE (or OVERSLIDING) is the act of an offensive player when his slide 
to a base, other than when advancing from home to first base, is with such momentum that 
he loses contact with the base. 
 A PENALTY is the application of these rules following an illegal act. 
 The PERSON of a player or an umpire is any part of his body, his clothing or his 
equipment. 
 A PITCH is a ball delivered to the batter by the pitcher. 
 Rule 2.00 (Pitch) Comment:  All other deliveries of the ball by one player to another are thrown 
balls. 
 A PITCHER is the fielder designated to deliver the pitch to the batter. Rule 2.00 
21 
 The pitcher’s PIVOT FOOT is that foot which is in contact with the pitcher’s plate 
as he delivers the pitch. 
 “PLAY” is the umpire’s order to start the game or to resume action following any 
dead ball. 
 A QUICK RETURN pitch is one made with obvious intent to catch a batter off 
balance. It is an illegal pitch. 
 REGULATION GAME.  See Rules 4.10 and 4.11. 
 A RETOUCH is the act of a runner in returning to a base as legally required. 
 A RUN (or SCORE) is the score made by an offensive player who advances from 
batter to runner and touches first, second, third and home bases in that order. 
 A RUN-DOWN is the act of the defense in an attempt to put out a runner between 
bases. 
 A RUNNER is an offensive player who  is advancing toward, or touching, or 
returning to any base. 
 “SAFE” is a declaration by the umpire that a runner is entitled to the base for which 
he was trying. 
 SET POSITION is one of the two legal pitching positions. 
 SQUEEZE PLAY is a term to designate a play when a team, with a runner on third 
base, attempts to score that runner by means of a bunt. 
 A STRIKE is a legal pitch when so called by the umpire, which— 
 (a) Is struck at by the batter and is missed; 
 (b) Is not struck at, if any part of the ball passes through any part of the strike 
zone; Rule 2.00 
22 
 (c) Is fouled by the batter when he has less than two strikes; 
 (d) Is bunted foul; 
 (e) Touches the batter as he strikes at it; 
 (f) Touches the batter in flight in the strike zone; or 
 (g) Becomes a foul tip. 
 The STRIKE ZONE is that area over  home plate the upper limit of which is a 
horizontal line at the midpoint between the top of the shoulders and the top of the uniform  
pants, and the lower level is a line at the hollow beneath the kneecap. The Strike Zone shall 
be determined from the batter’s stance as the batter is prepared to swing at a pitched ball. 
 (For diagram of STRIKE ZONE see page 23.) 
 A SUSPENDED GAME is a called game which is to be completed at a later date. 
 A TAG is the action of a fielder in touching a base with his body while holding the 
ball securely and firmly in his hand or glove; or touching a runner with the ball, or with his 
hand or glove holding the ball, while holding the ball securely and firmly in his hand or 
glove.  It is not a tag, however, if simultaneously or immediately following his touching a 
base or touching a runner, the fielder drops the ball.  In establishing the validity of the tag, 
the fielder shall hold the ball long enough to prove that he has complete control of the ball.  
If the fielder has made a tag and drops the ball while in the act of making a throw following 
the tag, the tag shall be adjudged to have been made. 
 A THROW is the act of propelling the ball with the hand and arm to a given 
objective and is to be distinguished, always, from the pitch. 
 A TIE GAME is a regulation game which is called when each team has the same 
number of runs. 
 “TIME” is the announcement by an umpire of a legal interruption of play, during 
which the ball is dead. 
 TOUCH.  To touch a player or umpire is to touch any part of his body, his clothing 
or his equipment. Rule 2.00 
23 
   Rule 2.00 
24 
 A TRIPLE PLAY is a play by the defense in which three offensive players are put 
out as a result of continuous action, providing there is no error between putouts. 
 A WILD PITCH is one so high, so low, or so wide of the plate that it cannot be 
handled with ordinary effort by the catcher. 
 WIND-UP POSITION is one of the two legal pitching positions. 
 Any reference in these Official Baseball Rules to “he,” “him” or “his” shall be 
deemed to be a reference to “she,” “her” or “hers,” as the case may be, when the person is 
a female. Rule 3.01 
25 
3.00—Game Preliminaries.
3.01 Before the game begins the umpire shall— 
(a) Require strict observance of all rules governing implements of play and equipment 
of players; 
(b) Be sure that all playing lines (heavy lines on Diagrams No. 1 and No. 2) are marked 
with lime, chalk or other white material easily distinguishable from the ground or 
grass; 
(c) Receive from the home club a supply of regulation baseballs, the number and make 
to be certified to the home club by the league president.  The umpire shall inspect 
the baseballs and ensure they are regulation baseballs and that they are properly 
rubbed so that the gloss is removed.  The umpire shall be the sole judge of the 
fitness of the balls to be used in the game; 
(d) Be assured by the home club that at least one dozen regulation reserve balls are 
immediately available for use if required; 
(e) Have in his possession at least two alternate balls and shall require replenishment of 
such supply of alternate balls as needed throughout the game.  Such alternate balls 
shall be put in play when— 
 (1) A ball has been batted out of the playing field or into the spectator area; 
 (2) A ball has become discolored or unfit for further use; 
 (3) The pitcher requests such alternate ball. 
 Rule 3.01(e) Comment:  The umpire shall not give an alternate ball to the pitcher until play has 
ended and the previously used ball is dead.  After a thrown or batted ball goes out of the playing field, 
play shall not be resumed with an alternate ball until the runners have reached the bases to which they 
are entitled.  After a home run is hit out of the playing grounds, the umpire shall not deliver a new ball to 
the pitcher or the catcher until the batter hitting the home run has crossed the plate. 
(f) Ensure that an official rosin bag is placed on the ground behind the pitcher’s plate 
prior to the start of each game.Rule 3.02 to 3.04 
26 
3.02 No player shall intentionally discolor or damage the ball by rubbing it with soil, 
rosin, paraffin, licorice, sand-paper, emery-paper or other foreign substance. 
 PENALTY:  The umpire shall demand the ball and remove the offender from the 
game.  In addition, the offender shall be suspended automatically for 10 games.  For 
rules in regard to a pitcher defacing the ball, see Rules 8.02(a)(2) through (6). 
3.03 A player, or players, may be substituted during a game at any time the ball is dead.  
A substitute player shall bat in the replaced player’s position in the team’s batting order.  A 
player once removed from a game shall not re-enter that game.  If a player who has been 
substituted for attempts to re-enter, or re-enters, the game in any capacity, the umpire-inchief shall direct the player’s manager to remove such player from the game immediately 
upon noticing the player’s presence or upon being informed of the player’s improper 
presence by another umpire or by either manager.  If such direction to remove the 
substituted-for player occurs before play commences with the substituted-for player 
improperly in the game, then the substitute player may enter the game.  If such direction to 
remove the substituted-for player occurs after play has commenced with the substituted-for 
player in the game, then the substitute player shall be deemed to have been removed from 
the game (in addition to the removal of the substituted-for player) and shall not enter the 
game. If a substitute enters the game in place of a player-manager, the manager may 
thereafter go to the coaching lines at his discretion.  When two or more substitute players of 
the defensive team enter the game at the same time, the manager shall, immediately before 
they take their positions as fielders, designate to the umpire-in-chief such players’ positions 
in the team’s batting order and the umpire-in-chief shall so notify the official scorer.  If this 
information is not immediately given to the umpire-in-chief, he shall have authority to 
designate the substitutes’ places in the batting order. 
 Rule 3.03 Comment:  A pitcher may change to another position only once during the same inning; 
e.g. the pitcher will not be allowed to assume a position other than a pitcher more than once in the same 
inning. 
 Any player other than a pitcher substituted for an injured player shall be allowed five warm-up 
throws.  (See Rule 8.03 for pitchers.) 
 Any play that occurs while a player appears in a game after having been substituted for shall count.  
If, in an umpire’s judgment, the player re-entered the game knowing that he had been removed, the 
umpire may eject the manager. 
3.04 A player whose name is on his team’s batting order may not become a substitute 
runner for another member of his team. 
 Rule 3.04 Comment:  This rule is intended to eliminate the practice of using so-called courtesy 
runners.  No player in the game shall be permitted to act as a courtesy runner for a teammate.  No player Rule 3.04 to 3.07 
27 
who has been in the game and has been taken out for a substitute shall return as a courtesy runner.  Any 
player not in the lineup, if used as a runner, shall be considered as a substitute player. 
3.05   
(a) The pitcher named in the batting order handed the umpire-in-chief, as provided in 
Rules 4.01 (a) and 4.01 (b), shall pitch to the first batter or any substitute batter until 
such batter is put out or reaches first base, unless the pitcher sustains injury or 
illness which, in the judgment of the umpire-in-chief, incapacitates him from 
pitching. 
(b) If the pitcher is replaced, the substitute pitcher shall pitch to the batter then at bat, or 
any substitute batter, until such batter is put out or reaches first base, or until the 
offensive team is put out, unless the substitute pitcher sustains injury or illness 
which, in the umpire-in-chief’s judgment, incapacitates him for further play as a 
pitcher. 
(c) If an improper substitution is made for the pitcher, the umpire shall direct the proper 
pitcher to return to the game until the provisions of this rule are fulfilled. If the 
improper pitcher is permitted to pitch, any play that results is legal.  The improper 
pitcher becomes the proper pitcher as soon as he makes his first pitch to the batter, 
or as soon as any runner is put out. 
 Rule 3.05(c) Comment:  If a manager attempts to remove a pitcher in violation of Rule 3.05 (c) the 
umpire shall notify the manager of the offending club that it cannot be done.  If, by chance, the 
umpire-in-chief has, through oversight, announced the incoming improper pitcher, he should still correct 
the situation before the improper pitcher pitches. Once the improper pitcher delivers a pitch he becomes 
the proper pitcher. 
3.06 The manager shall immediately notify the umpire-in-chief of any substitution and 
shall state to the umpire-in-chief the substitute’s place in the batting order. 
 Rule 3.06 Comment:  Players for whom substitutions have been made may remain with their team 
on the bench or may “warm-up” pitchers.  If a manager substitutes another player for himself, he may 
continue to direct his team from the bench or the coach’s box.  Umpires should not permit players for 
whom substitutes have been made, and who are permitted to remain on the bench, to address any 
remarks to any opposing player or manager, or to the umpires. 
3.07 The umpire-in-chief, after having been notified, shall immediately announce, or 
cause to be announced, each substitution. Rule 3.08 to 3.10 
28 
3.08   
(a) If no announcement of a substitution is made, the substitute shall be considered as 
having entered the game when— 
 (1) If a pitcher, he takes his place on the pitcher’s plate; 
 (2) If a batter, he takes his place in the batter’s box; 
 (3) If a fielder, he reaches the position usually occupied by the fielder he has 
replaced, and play commences; 
 (4) If a runner, he takes the place of the runner he has replaced. 
(b) Any play made by, or on, any of the above mentioned unannounced substitutes shall 
be legal. 
3.09 Players in uniform shall not address or mingle with spectators, nor sit in the stands 
before, during, or after a game.  No manager, coach or player shall address any spectator 
before or during a game.  Players of opposing teams shall not fraternize at any time while in 
uniform. 
3.10  
(a) The home team shall be the sole judge as to whether a game shall not be started 
because of unsuitable weather conditions or the unfit condition of the playing field, 
except for the second game of a doubleheader. EXCEPTION:  Any league may 
permanently authorize its president to suspend the application of this rule as to that 
league during the closing weeks of its championship season in order to assure that 
the championship is decided each year on its merits.  When the postponement of, 
and possible failure to play, a game in the final series of a championship season 
between any two teams might affect the final standing of any club in the league, the 
president, on appeal from any league club, may assume the authority granted the 
home team by this rule. 
(b) The umpire-in-chief of the first game shall be the sole judge as to whether the 
second game of a doubleheader shall not be started because of unsuitable weather 
conditions or the unfit condition of the playing field. Rule 3.11 to 3.15 
29 
3.11 Between games of a doubleheader, or whenever a game is suspended because of the 
unfitness of the playing field, the umpire-in-chief shall have control of ground-keepers and 
assistants for the purpose of making the playing field fit for play. 
 PENALTY:  For violation, the umpire-in-chief may forfeit the game to the visiting 
team. 
3.12 When an umpire suspends play, he shall call “Time.”  At the umpire-in-chief’s call 
of “Play,” the suspension is lifted and play resumes. Between the call of “Time” and the call 
of “Play” the ball is dead. 
3.13 The manager of the home team shall present to the umpire-in-chief and the 
opposing manager any ground rules he thinks necessary covering the overflow of spectators 
upon the playing field, batted or thrown balls into such overflow, or any other 
contingencies.  If these rules are acceptable to the opposing manager they shall be legal.  If 
these rules are unacceptable to the opposing manager, the umpire-in-chief shall make and 
enforce any special ground rules he thinks are made necessary by ground conditions, which 
shall not conflict with the official playing rules. 
3.14 Members of the offensive team shall carry all gloves and other equipment off the 
field and to the dugout while their team is at bat.  No equipment shall be left lying on the 
field, either in fair or foul territory. 
3.15 No person shall be allowed on the playing field during a game except players and 
coaches in uniform, managers, news photographers authorized by the home team, umpires, 
officers of the law in uniform and watchmen or other employees of the home club.  In case 
of unintentional interference with play by any person herein authorized to be on the playing 
field (except members of the team at bat who are participating in the game, or a base coach, 
any of whom interfere with a fielder attempting to field a batted or thrown ball; or an 
umpire) the ball is alive and in play.  If the interference is intentional, the ball shall be dead 
at the moment of the interference and the umpire shall impose such penalties as in his 
opinion will nullify the act of interference. 
 Rule 3.15 Comment:  For interference with a fielder attempting to field a batted or thrown ball by 
members of the team at bat or base coaches, who are excepted in Rule 3.15, see Rule 7.11.  See also 
Rules 5.09(b), 5.09(f) and 6.08(d), which cover interference by an umpire, and Rule 7.08(b), which 
covers interference by a runner. 
 The question of intentional or unintentional interference shall be decided on the basis of the 
person’s action.  For example: a bat boy, ball attendant, policeman, etc., who tries to avoid being touched 
by a thrown or batted ball but still is touched by the ball would be involved in unintentional interference.  Rule 3.15 to 3.17 
30 
If, however, he kicks the ball or picks it up or pushes it, that is considered intentional interference, 
regardless of what his thought may have been. 
 PLAY:  Batter hits ball to shortstop, who fields ball but throws wild past first baseman.  The coach 
at first base, to avoid being hit by the ball, falls to the ground and the first baseman on his way to retrieve 
the wild thrown ball, runs into the coach.  The batter-runner finally ends up on third base.  Whether the 
umpire should call interference on the part of the coach is up to the judgment of the umpire and if the 
umpire felt that the coach did all he could to avoid interfering with the play, no interference need be 
called.  If, in the judgment of the umpire, the coach was attempting to make it appear that he was trying 
not to interfere, the umpire should rule interference. 
3.16 When there is spectator interference with any thrown or batted ball, the ball shall be 
dead at the moment of interference and the umpire shall impose such penalties as in his 
opinion will nullify the act of interference. 
    
 APPROVED RULING:  If spectator interference clearly prevents a fielder from 
catching a fly ball, the umpire shall declare the batter out. 
 Rule 3.16 Comment:  There is a difference between a ball which has been thrown or batted into the 
stands, touching a spectator thereby being out of play even though it rebounds onto the field and a 
spectator going onto the field or reaching over, under or through a barrier and touching a ball in play or 
touching or otherwise interfering with a player.  In the latter case it is clearly intentional and shall be 
dealt with as intentional interference as in Rule 3.15.  Batter and runners shall be placed where in the 
umpire’s judgment they would have been had the interference not occurred. 
 No interference shall be allowed when a fielder reaches over a fence, railing, rope or into a stand to 
catch a ball.  He does so at his own risk.  However, should a spectator reach out on the playing field side 
of such fence, railing or rope, and plainly prevent the fielder from catching the ball, then the batsman 
should be called out for the spectator’s interference. 
 Example:  Runner on third base, one out and a batter hits a fly ball deep to the outfield (fair or 
foul).  Spectator clearly interferes with the outfielder attempting to catch the fly ball.  Umpire calls the 
batter out for spectator interference.  Ball is dead at the time of the call.  Umpire decides that because of 
the distance the ball was hit, the runner on third base would have scored after the catch if the fielder had 
caught the ball which was interfered with, therefore, the runner is permitted to score.  This might not be 
the case if such fly ball was interfered with a short distance from home plate. 
3.17 Players and substitutes of both teams shall confine themselves to their team’s 
benches unless actually participating in the play or preparing to enter the game, or coaching 
at first or third base.  No one except players, substitutes, managers, coaches, trainers and bat 
boys shall occupy a bench during a game. 
 PENALTY:  For violation the umpire may, after warning, remove the offender from 
the field. 
 Rule 3.17 Comment:  Players on the disabled list are permitted to participate in pre-game activity 
and sit on the bench during a game but may not take part in any activity during the game such as 
warming up a pitcher, bench-jockeying, etc.  Disabled players are not allowed to enter the playing 
surface at any time or for any purpose during the game. Rule 3.18 
31 
3.18 The home team shall provide police protection sufficient to preserve order.  If a 
person, or persons, enter the playing field during a game and interfere in any way with the 
play, the visiting team may refuse to play until the field is cleared. 
 PENALTY:  If the field is not cleared in a reasonable length of time, which shall in 
no case be less than 15 minutes after the visiting team’s refusal to play, the umpirein-chief may forfeit the game to the visiting team. Rule 4.01 
32 
4.00—Starting and Ending a Game.
4.01 Unless the home club shall have given previous notice that the game has been 
postponed or will be delayed in starting, the umpire, or umpires, shall enter the playing field 
five minutes before the hour set for the game to begin and proceed directly to home base 
where they shall be met by the managers of the opposing teams.  In sequence— 
(a) First, the home manager, or his designee, shall give his batting order to the 
umpire-in-chief, in duplicate. 
(b) Next, the visiting manager, or his designee, shall give his batting order to the 
umpire-in-chief, in duplicate. 
(c) As a courtesy, each lineup card presented to the umpire-in-chief should list the 
fielding positions to be played by each player in the batting order.  If a designated 
hitter is to be used, the lineup card shall designate which hitter is to be the 
designated hitter.  See Rule 6.10(b).  As a courtesy, potential substitute players 
should also be listed, but the failure to  list a potential substitute player shall not 
make such potential substitute player ineligible to enter the game. 
(d) The umpire-in-chief shall make certain that the original and copies of the respective 
batting orders are identical, and then tender a copy of each batting order to the 
opposing manager.  The copy retained by the umpire shall be the official batting 
order.  The tender of the batting order by the umpire shall establish the batting 
orders.  Thereafter, no substitutions shall be made by either manager, except as 
provided in the rules. 
(e) As soon as the home team’s batting order is handed to the umpire-in-chief the 
umpires are in charge of the playing field and from that moment the umpire-in-chief 
shall have sole authority to determine when a game shall be called, suspended or 
resumed on account of weather or the condition of the playing field.  The umpire-inchief shall not call the game until at least 30 minutes after he has suspended play.  
The umpire-in-chief may continue the suspension so long as he believes there is any 
chance to resume play. 
 Rule 4.01 Comment:  Obvious errors in the batting order, which are noticed by the umpire-in-chief 
before he calls “Play” for the start of the game, should be called to the attention of the manager or 
captain of the team in error, so the correction can be made before the game starts.  For example, if a 
manager has inadvertently listed only eight men in the batting order, or has listed two players with the 
same last name but without an identifying initial and the errors are noticed by the umpire before he calls 
“play,” he shall cause such error or errors to be corrected before he calls “play” to start the game.  Teams Rule 4.01 to 4.05 
33 
should not be “trapped” later by some mistake that obviously was inadvertent and which can be 
corrected before the game starts. 
 The umpire-in-chief shall at all times try to complete a game.  His authority to resume play 
following one or more suspensions of as much as 30 minutes each shall be absolute and he shall 
terminate a game only when there appears to be no possibility of completing it. 
 The Major Leagues have determined that Rule 4.01(e) does not apply to any Division Series, 
League Championship Series or World Series games or for any additional Major League championship 
season game played to break a tie. 
4.02 The players of the home team shall take their defensive positions, the first batter of 
the visiting team shall take his position in the batter’s box, the umpire shall call “Play” and 
the game shall start. 
4.03 When the ball is put in play at the start of, or during a game, all fielders other than 
the catcher shall be on fair territory. 
(a) The catcher shall station himself directly back of the plate.  He may leave his 
position at any time to catch a pitch or make a play except that when the batter is 
being given an intentional base on balls, the catcher must stand with both feet 
within the lines of the catcher’s box until the ball leaves the pitcher’s hand. 
 PENALTY: Balk. 
(b) The pitcher, while in the act of delivering the ball to the batter, shall take his legal 
position; 
(c) Except the pitcher and the catcher, any fielder may station himself anywhere in fair 
territory. 
4.04 The batting order shall be followed throughout the game unless a player is 
substituted for another.  In that case the substitute shall take the place of the replaced player 
in the batting order. 
4.05  
(a) The team at bat shall station two base coaches on the field during its time at bat, one 
near first base and one near third base. 
(b) Base coaches shall be limited to two in number and shall (1) be in team uniform, 
and (2) remain within the coach’s box at all times. Rule 4.05 to 4.07 
34 
 PENALTY:  The offending base coach shall be removed from the game, and shall 
leave the playing field. 
 Rule 4.05 Comment:  It has been common practice for many years for some coaches to put one 
foot outside the coach’s box or stand astride or otherwise be slightly outside the coaching box lines.  
Until a batted ball passes a coach, a coach is not permitted to position himself closer to home plate than 
the coach’s box nor closer to fair territory than the coach’s box.  Otherwise, a coach shall not be 
considered out of the box unless the opposing manager complains, in which case the umpire shall strictly 
enforce the rule and require all coaches (on both teams) to remain in the coach’s box at all times. 
 It is also common practice for a coach who has a play at his base to leave the coach’s box to signal 
the player to slide, advance or return to a base.  This may be allowed if the coach does not interfere with 
the play in any manner. 
4.06  
(a) No manager, player, substitute, coach, trainer or batboy shall at any time, whether 
from the bench, the coach’s box or on the playing field, or elsewhere— 
 (1) Incite, or try to incite, by word or sign a demonstration by spectators; 
 (2) Use language which will in any manner refer to or reflect upon opposing 
players, an umpire, or any spectator; 
 (3) Call “Time,” or employ any other word or phrase or commit any act while the 
ball is alive and in play for the obvious purpose of trying to make the pitcher 
commit a balk. 
 (4) Make intentional contact with the umpire in any manner. 
(b) No fielder shall take a position in the batter’s line of vision, and with deliberate 
unsportsmanlike intent, act in a manner to distract the batter. 
 PENALTY:  The offender shall be removed from the game and shall leave the 
playing field, and, if a balk is made, it shall be nullified. 
4.07 When a manager, player, coach or trainer is ejected from a game, he shall leave the 
field immediately and take no further part in that game. He shall remain in the club house or 
change to street clothes and either leave the park or take a seat in the grandstand well 
removed from the vicinity of his team’s bench or bullpen. 
 Rule 4.07 Comment:  If a manager, coach or player is under suspension he may not be in the 
dugout or press box during the course of a game. Rule 4.08 to 4.09 
35 
4.08 When the occupants of a player’s bench show violent disapproval of an umpire’s 
decision, the umpire shall first give warning that such disapproval shall cease. If such action 
continues— 
 PENALTY:  The umpire shall order the offenders from the bench to the club house. 
If he is unable to detect the offender, or offenders, he may clear the bench of all 
substitute players.  The manager of the offending team shall have the privilege of 
recalling to the playing field only those players needed for substitution in the game. 
4.09  HOW A TEAM SCORES. 
(a) One run shall be scored each time a runner legally advances to and touches first, 
second, third and home base before three men are put out to end the inning. 
EXCEPTION:  A run is not scored if the runner advances to home base during a 
play in which the third out is made (1) by the batter-runner before he touches first 
base; (2) by any runner being forced out; or (3) by a preceding runner who is 
declared out because he failed to touch one of the bases. 
(b) When the winning run is scored in the last half-inning of a regulation game, or in 
the last half of an extra inning, as the result of a base on balls, hit batter or any other 
play with the bases full which forces the runner on third to advance, the umpire 
shall not declare the game ended until the runner forced to advance from third has 
touched home base and the batter-runner has touched first base. 
 Rule 4.09(b) Comment:  An exception will be if fans rush onto the field and physically prevent the 
runner from touching home plate or the batter from touching first base.  In such cases, the umpires shall 
award the runner the base because of the obstruction by the fans. 
 PENALTY:  If the runner on third refuses to advance to and touch home base in a 
reasonable time, the umpire shall disallow the run, call out the offending player and 
order the game resumed.  If, with two out, the batter-runner refuses to advance to 
and touch first base, the umpire shall disallow the run, call out the offending player, 
and order the game resumed.  If, before two are out, the batter-runner refuses to 
advance to and touch first base, the run shall count, but the offending player shall be 
called out. 
 Rule 4.09 Comment:  APPROVED RULING:  No run shall score during a play in which the third 
out is made by the batter-runner before he touches first base.  Example:  One out, Jones on second, Smith 
on first.  The batter, Brown, hits safely.  Jones scores.  Smith is out on the throw to the plate.  Two outs.  
But Brown missed first base.  The ball is thrown to first, an appeal is made, and Brown is out.  Three 
outs.  Since Jones crossed the plate during a play in which the third out was made by the batter-runner 
before he touched first base, Jones’ run does not count. Rule 4.09 to 4.10 
36 
 APPROVED RULING:  Following runners are not affected by an act of a preceding runner unless 
two are out. 
 Example:  One out, Jones on second, Smith on first, and batter, Brown, hits home run inside the 
park.  Jones fails to touch third on his way to the plate.  Smith and Brown score.  The defense holds the 
ball on third, appeals to umpire, and Jones is out.  Smith’s and Brown’s runs count. 
 APPROVED RULING:  Two out, Jones on second, Smith on first and batter, Brown, hits home 
run inside the park.  All three runs cross the plate.  But Jones missed third base, and on appeal is declared 
out.  Three outs.  Smith’s and Brown’s runs are voided.  No score on the play. 
 APPROVED RULING:  One out, Jones on third, Smith on second.  Batter Brown flies out to 
center.  Two out.  Jones scores after catch and Smith scores on bad throw to plate.  But Jones, on appeal, 
is adjudged to have left third before the catch and is out.  Three outs.  No runs. 
 APPROVED RULING:  Two out, bases full, batter hits home run over fence.  Batter, on appeal, is 
declared out for missing first base.  Three outs.  No run counts. 
 Here is a general statement that covers: 
 When a runner misses a base and a fielder holds the ball on a missed base, or on the base originally 
occupied by the runner if a fly ball is caught, and appeals for the umpire’s decision, the runner is out 
when the umpire sustains the appeal; all runners may score if possible, except that with two out the 
runner is out at the moment he misses the bag, if an appeal is sustained as applied to the following 
runners. 
 APPROVED RULING:  One out, Jones on third, Smith on first, and Brown flies out to right field. 
Two outs.  Jones tags up and scores after the catch.  Smith attempted to return to first but the right 
fielder’s throw beat him to the base. Three outs.  But Jones scored before the throw to catch Smith 
reached first base, hence Jones’ run counts.  It was not a force play. 
4.10  
(a) A regulation game consists of nine innings, unless extended because of a tie score, 
or shortened (1) because the home team needs none of its half of the ninth inning or 
only a fraction of it, or (2) because the umpire-in-chief calls the game. 
EXCEPTION:  National Association leagues may adopt a rule providing that one or 
both games of a doubleheader shall be seven innings in length.  In such games, any 
of these rules applying to the ninth inning shall apply to the seventh inning. 
(b) If the score is tied after nine completed innings play shall continue until (1) the 
visiting team has scored more total runs than the home team at the end of a 
completed inning, or (2) the home team scores the winning run in an uncompleted 
inning. 
(c) If a game is called, it is a regulation game: 
 (1) If five innings have been completed; 
 (2) If the home team has scored more runs in four or four and a fraction 
half-innings than the visiting team has scored in five completed half-innings; Rule 4.10 to 4.11 
37 
 (3) If the home team scores one or more runs in its half of the fifth inning to tie 
the score. 
(d) If a regulation game is called with the score tied, it shall become a suspended game. 
See Rule 4.12. 
(e) If a game is called before it has become a regulation game, the umpire-in-chief shall 
declare it “No Game.” 
(f) A League President may determine whether rain checks will be honored for any 
regulation or suspended game that has progressed to or beyond a point of play 
described in 4.10(c). 
 Rule 4.10 Comment:  The Major Leagues have determined that Rules 4.10(c) and 4.10(e) do not 
apply to any Division Series, League Championship Series or World Series games or for any additional 
Major League championship season game played to break a tie. 
4.11 The score of a regulation game is the total number of runs scored by each team at 
the moment the game ends. 
(a) The game ends when the visiting team completes its half of the ninth inning if the 
home team is ahead. 
(b) The game ends when the ninth inning is completed, if the visiting team is ahead. 
(c) If the home team scores the winning run in its half of the ninth inning (or its half of 
an extra inning after a tie), the game ends immediately when the winning run is 
scored.  EXCEPTION:  If the last batter in a game hits a home run out of the 
playing field, the batter-runner and all runners on base are permitted to score, in 
accordance with the base-running rules, and the game ends when the batter-runner 
touches home plate. 
 APPROVED RULING:  The batter hits a home run out of the playing field to win 
the game in the last half of the ninth or an extra inning, but is called out for passing 
a preceding runner.  The game ends immediately when the winning run is scored, 
unless there are two out and the winning run has not yet reached home plate when 
the runner passes another, in which case the inning is over and only those runs that 
scored before the runner passes another shall count. 
(d) A called game ends at the moment the umpire terminates play, unless it becomes a 
suspended game pursuant to Rule 4.12(a). Rule 4.12 
38 
4.12  SUSPENDED GAMES. 
(a) A game shall become a suspended game that must be completed at a future date if 
the game is terminated for any of the following reasons: 
 (1) A curfew imposed by law; 
 (2) A time limit permissible under league rules; 
 (3) Light failure or malfunction of a mechanical field device under control of the 
home club. (Mechanical field device shall include automatic tarpaulin or water 
removal equipment); 
 (4) Darkness, when a law prevents the lights from being turned on; 
 (5) Weather, if a regulation game is called while an inning is in progress and 
before the inning is completed, and the visiting team has scored one or more 
runs to take the lead, and the home team has not retaken the lead; or 
 (6) It is a regulation game that is called with the score tied. 
National Association Leagues may also adopt the following rules for suspended 
games. (If adopted by a National Association League, Rule 4.10(e) would not apply 
to their games.): 
 (7) The game has not become a regulation game (4½ innings with the home team 
ahead, or 5 innings with the visiting club ahead or tied). 
 (8) If a game is suspended before it becomes a regulation game, and is continued 
prior to another regularly scheduled game, the regularly scheduled game shall 
be seven innings in length.  See the exception described in Rule 4.10(a). 
 (9) If a game is suspended after it is a regulation game, and is continued prior to 
another regularly scheduled game, the regularly scheduled game shall be a 
nine-inning game. 
EXCEPTION:  Optional Rules 4.12(a)(7), 4.12(a)(8) and 4.12(a)(9) for 
National Association Leagues shall not apply to the last scheduled game 
between the two teams during the championship season.  A National Rule 4.12 
39 
Association League may adopt any of Rules 4.12(a)(7), 4.12(a)(8) and 
4.12(a)(9) for its post-season games. 
 No game called because of a curfew (Rule 4.12(a)(1)), weather (Rule 4.12(a)(5)), a 
time limit (Rule 4.12(a)(2)) or with a tied score (Rule 4.12(a)(6)) shall be a 
suspended game unless it has progressed far enough to have been a regulation game 
pursuant to Rule 4.10(c).  A game called pursuant to Rules 4.12(a)(3) or 4.12(a)(4) 
shall be a suspended game at any time after it starts. 
NOTE:  Weather and similar conditions—Rules 4.12(a)(1) through 4.12(a)(5)—
shall take precedence in determining whether a called game shall be a suspended 
game.  If a game is halted by weather, and subsequent light failure or an intervening 
curfew or time limit prevents its resumption, the game shall not be a suspended 
game.  If a game is halted by light failure, and weather or field conditions prevent 
its resumption, the game shall not be a suspended game.  A game can only be 
considered a suspended game if stopped for any of the six reasons specified in Rule 
4.12(a). 
 Rule 4.12(a) Comment:  The Major Leagues have determined that Rule 4.12(a) does not apply to 
any Division Series, League Championship Series or World Series games or for any additional Major 
League championship season game played to break a tie. 
(b) A suspended game shall be resumed and completed as follows: 
 (1) Immediately preceding the next scheduled single game between the two clubs 
on the same grounds; or 
 (2) Immediately preceding the next scheduled doubleheader between the two 
clubs on the same grounds, if no single game remains on the schedule; or 
 (3) If suspended on the last scheduled date between the two clubs in that city, 
transferred and played on the grounds of the opposing club, if possible; 
  (i) Immediately preceding the next scheduled single game, or 
  (ii) Immediately preceding the next scheduled doubleheader, if no single 
game remains on the schedule. 
 (4) Any suspended game not completed prior to the last scheduled game between 
the two teams during the championship season shall become a called game.  If 
such game becomes a called game and Rule 4.12 to 4.13 
40 
(i) has progressed far enough to become a regulation game, and one team is 
ahead, the team that is ahead shall be declared the winner; 
(ii)  has progressed far enough to become a regulation game, and the score is 
tied, the game shall be declared a “tie game.”  A tie game is to be 
replayed in its entirety, unless the league president determines that 
playing the rescheduled game is not necessary to affect the league 
championship; or 
(iii) has not progressed far enough to become a regulation game, the game 
shall be declared “No Game.”  In such case, the game is to be replayed 
in its entirety, unless the league president determines that playing the 
rescheduled game is not necessary to affect the league championship. 
 Rule 4.12(b) Comment:  The Major Leagues have determined that Rule 4.12(b) does not apply to 
any Division Series, League Championship Series or World Series games or for any additional Major 
League championship season game played to break a tie. 
(c) A suspended game shall be resumed at the exact point of suspension of the original 
game.  The completion of a suspended game is a continuation of the original game. 
The lineup and batting order of both teams shall be exactly the same as the lineup 
and batting order at the moment of suspension, subject to the rules governing 
substitution.  Any player may be replaced by a player who had not been in the game 
prior to the suspension.  No player removed before the suspension may be returned 
to the lineup. 
 A player who was not with the club when the game was suspended may be used as 
a substitute, even if he has taken the place of a player no longer with the club who 
would not have been eligible because he had been removed from the lineup before 
the game was suspended. 
 Rule 4.12(c) Comment:  If immediately prior to the call of a suspended game, a substitute pitcher 
has been announced but has not retired the side or pitched until the batter becomes a base runner, such 
pitcher, when the suspended game is later resumed may, but is not required to start the resumed portion 
of the game.  However, if he does not start he will be considered as having been substituted for and may 
not be used in that game. 
4.13  RULES GOVERNING DOUBLEHEADERS. 
(a) (1) Only two championship games shall be played on one date.  Completion of a 
suspended game shall not violate this rule. Rule 4.13 to 4.15 
41 
 (2) If two games are scheduled to be played for one admission on one date, the 
first game shall be the regularly scheduled game for that date. 
(b) After the start of the first game of a doubleheader, that game shall be completed 
before the second game of the doubleheader shall begin. 
(c) The second game of a doubleheader shall start twenty minutes after the first game is 
completed, unless a longer interval (not to exceed thirty minutes) is declared by the 
umpire-in-chief and announced to the opposing managers at the end of the first 
game.  EXCEPTION:  If the league president has approved a request of the home 
club for a longer interval between games for some special event, the umpire-in-chief 
shall declare such longer interval and announce it to the opposing managers.  The 
umpire-in-chief of the first game shall be the timekeeper controlling the interval 
between games. 
(d) The umpire shall start the second game of a doubleheader, if at all possible, and 
play shall continue as long as ground conditions, local time restrictions, or weather 
permit. 
(e) When a regularly scheduled doubleheader is delayed in starting for any cause, any 
game that is started is the first game of the doubleheader. 
(f) When a rescheduled game is part of a doubleheader the rescheduled game shall be 
the second game, and the first game shall be the regularly scheduled game for that 
date. 
4.14 The umpire-in-chief shall order the playing field lights turned on whenever in his 
opinion darkness makes further play in daylight hazardous. 
4.15 A game may be forfeited to the opposing team when a team— 
(a) Fails to appear upon the field, or being upon the field, refuses to start play within 
five minutes after the umpire-in-chief has called “Play” at the appointed hour for 
beginning the game, unless such delayed appearance is, in the umpire-in-chief’s 
judgment, unavoidable; 
(b) Employs tactics palpably designed to delay or shorten the game; 
(c) Refuses to continue play during a game unless the game has been suspended or 
terminated by the umpire-in-chief; Rule 4.15 to 4.19 
42 
(d) Fails to resume play, after a suspension, within one minute after the umpire-in-chief 
has called “Play;” 
(e) After warning by the umpire, willfully and persistently violates any rules of the 
game; 
(f) Fails to obey within a reasonable time the umpire’s order for removal of a player 
from the game; 
(g) Fails to appear for the second game of a doubleheader within twenty minutes after 
the close of the first game unless the umpire-in-chief of the first game shall have 
extended the time of the intermission. 
4.16 A game shall be forfeited to the visiting team if, after it has been suspended, the 
order of the umpire to groundskeepers respecting preparation of the field for resumption of 
play are not complied with. 
4.17 A game shall be forfeited to the opposing team when a team is unable or refuses to 
place nine players on the field. 
4.18 If the umpire-in-chief declares a game forfeited he shall transmit a written report to 
the league president within 24 hours thereafter, but failure of such transmittal shall not affect 
the forfeiture. 
4.19 PROTESTING GAMES.  Each league shall adopt rules governing procedure for 
protesting a game, when a manager claims that an umpire’s decision is in violation of these 
rules.  No protest shall ever be permitted on judgment decisions by the umpire. In all 
protested games, the decision of the League President shall be final. 
 Even if it is held that the protested decision violated the rules, no replay of the game 
will be ordered unless in the opinion of the League President the violation adversely 
affected the protesting team’s chances of winning the game. 
 Rule 4.19 Comment:  Whenever a manager protests a game because of alleged misapplication of 
the rules the protest will not be recognized unless the umpires are notified at the time the play under 
protest occurs and before the next pitch, play or attempted play.  A protest arising on a game-ending play 
may be filed until 12 noon the following day with the league office. Rule 5.01 to 5.09 
43 
5.00—Putting the Ball in Play.  Live Ball.
5.01  At the time set for beginning the game the umpire-in-chief shall call “Play.” 
5.02 After the umpire calls “Play” the ball is alive and in play and remains alive and in 
play until for legal cause, or at the umpire’s call of “Time” suspending play, the ball 
becomes dead.  While the ball is dead no player may be put out, no bases may be run and no 
runs may be scored, except that runners may advance one or more bases as the result of acts 
which occurred while the ball was alive (such as, but not limited to a balk, an overthrow, 
interference, or a home run or other fair ball hit out of the playing field). 
 Rule 5.02 Comment:  Should a ball come partially apart in a game, it is in play until the play is 
completed. 
5.03 The pitcher shall deliver the pitch to the batter who may elect to strike the ball, or 
who may not offer at it, as he chooses. 
5.04 The offensive team’s objective is to have its batter become a runner, and its runners 
advance. 
5.05 The defensive team’s objective is to prevent offensive players from becoming 
runners, and to prevent their advance around the bases. 
5.06 When a batter becomes a runner and touches all bases legally he shall score one run 
for his team. 
 Rule 5.06 Comment:  A run legally scored cannot be nullified by subsequent action of the runner, 
such as but not limited to an effort to return to third base in the belief that he had left the base before a 
caught fly ball. 
5.07 When three offensive players are legally put out, that team takes the field and the 
opposing team becomes the offensive team. 
5.08 If a thrown ball accidentally touches a base coach, or a pitched or thrown ball 
touches an umpire, the ball is alive and in play.  However, if the coach interferes with a 
thrown ball, the runner is out. 
5.09 The ball becomes dead and runners advance one base, or return to their bases, 
without liability to be put out, when— Rule 5.09  
44 
(a) A pitched ball touches a batter, or his clothing, while in his legal batting position; 
runners, if forced, advance; 
(b) The plate umpire interferes with the catcher’s throw attempting to prevent a stolen 
base or retire a runner on a pick-off play; runners may not advance. 
 NOTE:  The interference shall be disregarded if the catcher’s throw retires the 
runner. 
 Rule 5.09(b) Comment: Umpire interference may also occur when an umpire interferes with a 
catcher returning the ball to the pitcher. 
(c)  A balk is committed; runners advance; (See Penalty 8.05). 
(d) A ball is illegally batted; runners return; 
(e) A foul ball is not caught, in which case runners return to their bases.  The umpirein-chief shall not put the ball in play until all runners have retouched their bases; 
(f) A fair ball touches a runner or an umpire on fair territory before it touches an 
infielder including the pitcher, or touches an umpire before it has passed an infielder 
other than the pitcher; runners advance, if forced. 
 If a fair ball goes through, or by, an infielder, no other infielder has a chance to 
make a play on the ball and the ball touches a runner immediately behind the 
infielder that the ball went through, or by, the ball is in play and the umpire shall not 
declare the runner out.  If a fair ball touches a runner after being deflected by an 
infielder, the ball is in play and the umpire shall not declare the runner out; 
 Rule 5.09(f) Comment:  If a fair ball touches an umpire working in the infield after it has bounded 
past, or over, the pitcher, it is a dead ball.  If a batted ball is deflected by a fielder in fair territory and hits 
a runner or an umpire while still in flight and then caught by an infielder it shall not be a catch, but the 
ball shall remain in play. 
(g) A pitched ball lodges in the umpire’s or catcher’s mask or paraphernalia, and 
remains out of play, runners advance one base; 
 Rule 5.09(g) Comment:  If a foul tip hits the umpire and is caught by a fielder on the rebound, the 
ball is “dead” and the batsman cannot be called out.  The same shall apply where such foul tip lodges in 
the umpire’s mask or other paraphernalia. 
 If a third strike (not a foul tip) passes the catcher and hits an umpire, the ball is in play.  If such ball 
rebounds and is caught by a fielder before it touches the ground, the batsman is not out on such a catch, 
but the ball remains in play and the batsman may be retired at first base, or touched with the ball for the 
out. Rule 5.09 to 5.10 
45 
 If a pitched ball lodges in the umpire’s or catcher’s mask or paraphernalia, and remains out of play, 
on the third strike or fourth ball, then the batter is entitled to first base and all runners advance one base. 
If the count on the batter is less than three balls, runners advance one base. 
(h) Any legal pitch touches a runner trying to score; runners advance. 
5.10 The ball becomes dead when an umpire calls “Time.”  The umpire-in-chief shall 
call “Time”— 
(a) When in his judgment weather, darkness or similar conditions make immediate 
further play impossible; 
(b) When light failure makes it difficult or impossible for the umpires to follow the 
play; 
 NOTE: A league may adopt its own regulations governing games interrupted by 
light failure. 
(c) When an accident incapacitates a player or an umpire; 
 (1) If an accident to a runner is such as to prevent him from proceeding to a base 
to which he is entitled, as on a home run hit out of the playing field, or an 
award of one or more bases, a substitute runner shall be permitted to complete 
the play. 
(d) When a manager requests “Time” for a substitution, or for a conference with one of 
his players. 
(e) When the umpire wishes to examine the ball, to consult with either manager, or for 
any similar cause. 
(f) When a fielder, after catching a fly ball, falls into a bench or stand, or falls across 
ropes into a crowd when spectators are on the field. As pertains to runners, the 
provisions of 7.04(c) shall prevail. 
 If a fielder after making a catch steps into a bench, but does not fall, the ball is in 
play and runners may advance at their own peril. 
(g) When an umpire orders a player or any other person removed from the playing 
field. Rule 5.10 to 5.11 
46 
(h) Except in the cases stated in paragraphs (b) and (c)(1) of this rule, no umpire shall 
call “Time” while a play is in progress. 
5.11 After the ball is dead, play shall be resumed when the pitcher takes his place on the 
pitcher’s plate with a new ball or the same ball in his possession and the plate umpire calls 
“Play.”  The plate umpire shall call “Play” as soon as the pitcher takes his place on his plate 
with the ball in his possession. Rule 6.01 to 6.02 
47 
6.00—The Batter.
6.01  
(a) Each player of the offensive team shall bat in the order that his name appears in his 
team’s batting order. 
(b) The first batter in each inning after the first inning shall be the player whose name 
follows that of the last player who legally completed his time at bat in the preceding 
inning. 
6.02  
(a) The batter shall take his position in the batter’s box promptly when it is his time at 
bat. 
(b) The batter shall not leave his position in the batter’s box after the pitcher comes to 
Set Position, or starts his windup. 
PENALTY:  If the pitcher pitches, the umpire shall call “Ball” or “Strike,” as the 
case may be. 
 Rule 6.02(b) Comment:  The batter leaves the batter’s box at the risk of having a strike delivered 
and called, unless he requests the umpire to call “Time.”  The batter is not at liberty to step in and out of 
the batter’s box at will. 
 Once a batter has taken his position in the batter’s box, he shall not be permitted to step out of the 
batter’s box in order to use the resin or the pine tar rag, unless there is a delay in the game action or, in 
the judgment of the umpires, weather conditions warrant an exception. 
 Umpires will not call “Time” at the request of the batter or any member of his team once the 
pitcher has started his windup or has come to a set position even though the batter claims “dust in his 
eyes,” “steamed glasses,” “didn’t get the sign” or for any other cause. 
 Umpires may grant a hitter’s request for “Time” once he is in the batter’s box, but the umpire 
should eliminate hitters walking out of the batter’s box without reason.  If umpires are not lenient, batters 
will understand that they are in the batter’s box and they must remain there until the ball is pitched.  See 
Rule 6.02(d). 
The following two paragraphs are additional material for Rule 6.02(b) Comment, for Major 
League play only: 
If pitcher delays once the batter is in his box and the umpire feels that the delay is not justified he 
may allow the batter to step out of the box momentarily. 
 If after the pitcher starts his windup or comes to a “set position” with a runner on, he does not go 
through with his pitch because the batter has stepped out of the box, it shall not be called a balk.  Both 
the pitcher and batter have violated a rule and the umpire shall call time and both the batter and pitcher 
start over from “scratch.” 
 The following paragraph is additional material for Rule 6.02(b) Comment, for National 
Association play (in lieu of the additional two paragraphs, above, that apply to Major League play): Rule 6.02 
48 
 If after the pitcher starts his windup or comes to a “set position” with a runner on, he does not go 
through with his pitch because the batter has stepped out of the box, the umpire shall not call a balk.  The 
umpire shall call an automatic strike if Rule 6.02(d)(1) calls for such sanction. 
(c) If the batter refuses to take his position in the batter’s box during his time at bat, the 
umpire shall call a strike on the batter.  The ball is dead, and no runners may 
advance.  After the penalty, the batter may take his proper position and the regular 
ball and strike count shall continue.  If the batter does not take his proper position 
before three strikes have been called, the batter shall be declared out. 
Rule 6.02(c) Comment:  The umpire shall give the batter a reasonable opportunity to take his 
proper position in the batter’s box after the umpire has called a strike pursuant to Rule 6.02(c) and 
before the umpire calls a successive strike pursuant to Rule 6.02(c). 
(d) The following rule shall be in effect for all National Association Leagues: 
(1) The batter shall keep at least one foot in the batter’s box throughout the 
batter’s time at bat, unless one of the following exceptions applies, in which 
case the batter may leave the batter’s box but not the dirt area surrounding 
home plate: 
 (i) The batter swings at a pitch; 
 (ii) The batter is forced out of the batter’s box by a pitch; 
 (iii) A member of either team requests and is granted “Time”; 
 (iv) A defensive player attempts a play on a runner at any base; 
 (v) The batter feints a bunt; 
 (vi) A wild pitch or passed ball occurs; 
 (vii) The pitcher leaves the dirt area of the pitching mound after receiving 
the ball; or 
 (viii)The catcher leaves the catcher’s box to give defensive signals. 
If the batter intentionally leaves the batter’s box and delays play, and none 
of the exceptions listed in Rule 6.02(d)(1)(i) through (viii) applies, the 
umpire shall award a strike without the pitcher having to deliver the pitch.  
The ball is dead, and no runners may advance.  The umpire shall award 
additional strikes, without the pitcher  having to deliver the pitch, if the 
batter remains outside the batter’s box and further delays play.   
Rule 6.02(d)(1) Comment:  The umpire has the discretion to issue a warning to a batter in lieu 
of calling an automatic strike for the batter’s first violation of Rule 6.02(d)(1) in a game, so long as 
the batter’s violation is judged to be brief and inadvertent.  The umpire shall give the batter a 
reasonable opportunity to take his proper position in the batter’s box after the umpire has called a Rule 6.02 to 6.05 
49 
strike pursuant to Rule 6.02(d)(1) and before the umpire calls a successive strike pursuant to Rule 
6.02(d)(1). 
 (2) The batter may leave the batter’s box and the dirt area surrounding home 
plate when “Time” is called for the purpose of 
(i) making a substitution; or 
 (ii) a conference by either team. 
Rule 6.02(d) Comment:  Umpires shall encourage the on-deck batter to take a position in the 
batter’s box quickly after the previous batter reaches base or is put out. 
6.03  The batter’s legal position shall be with both feet within the batter’s box. 
APPROVED RULING:  The lines defining the box are within the batter’s box. 
6.04  A batter has legally completed his time at bat when he is put out or becomes a 
runner. 
6.05  A batter is out when— 
(a) His fair or foul fly ball (other than a foul tip) is legally caught by a fielder; 
 Rule 6.05(a) Comment:  A fielder may reach into, but not step into, a dugout to make a catch, 
and if he holds the ball, the catch shall be allowed.  A fielder, in order to make a catch on a foul ball 
nearing a dugout or other out-of-play area (such as the stands), must have one or both feet on or over 
the playing surface (including the lip of the dugout) and neither foot on the ground inside the dugout 
or in any other out-of-play area.  Ball is in play, unless the fielder, after making a legal catch, falls 
into a dugout or other out-of-play area, in which case the ball is dead.  Status of runners shall be as 
described in Rule 7.04(c) Comment. 
(b) A third strike is legally caught by the catcher; 
 Rule 6.05(b) Comment:  “Legally caught” means in the catcher’s glove before the ball touches the 
ground.  It is not legal if the ball lodges in his clothing or paraphernalia; or if it touches the umpire and is 
caught by the catcher on the rebound. 
 If a foul tip first strikes the catcher’s glove and then goes on through and is caught by both hands 
against his body or protector, before the ball touches the ground, it is a strike, and if third strike, batter is 
out.  If smothered against his body or protector, it is a catch provided the ball struck the catcher’s glove 
or hand first. 
(c) A third strike is not caught by the catcher when first base is occupied before two are 
out; 
(d) He bunts foul on third strike; Rule 6.05 
50 
(e) An Infield Fly is declared; 
(f) He attempts to hit a third strike and the ball touches him; 
(g) His fair ball touches him before touching a fielder.  If the batter is in a legal position 
in the batter’s box, see Rule 6.03, and, in the umpire’s judgment, there was no 
intention to interfere with the course of the ball, a batted ball that strikes the batter 
or his bat shall be ruled a foul ball; 
(h) After hitting or bunting a fair ball, his bat hits the ball a second time in fair territory. 
The ball is dead and no runners may advance.  If the batter-runner drops his bat and 
the ball rolls against the bat in fair territory and, in the umpire’s judgment, there was 
no intention to interfere with the course of the ball, the ball is alive and in play.  If 
the batter is in a legal position in the  batter’s box, see Rule 6.03, and, in the 
umpire’s judgment, there was no intention to interfere with the course of the ball, a 
batted ball that strikes the batter or his bat shall be ruled a foul ball; 
 Rule 6.05(h) Comment:  If a bat breaks and part of it is in fair territory and is hit by a batted ball or 
part of it hits a runner or fielder, play shall continue and no interference called.  If batted ball hits part of 
a broken bat in foul territory, it is a foul ball. 
 If a whole bat is thrown into fair territory and interferes with a defensive player attempting to make 
a play, interference shall be called, whether intentional or not. 
 In cases where the batting helmet is accidentally hit with a batted ball on or over fair territory or a 
thrown ball, the ball remains in play the same as if it has not hit the helmet. 
 If a batted ball strikes a batting helmet or any other object foreign to the natural ground while on 
foul territory, it is a foul ball and the ball is dead. 
 If, in the umpire’s judgment, there is intent on the part of a baserunner to interfere with a batted or 
thrown ball by dropping the helmet or throwing it at the ball, then the runner would be out, the ball dead 
and runners would return to last base legally touched. 
(i) After hitting or bunting a ball that continues to move over foul territory, he 
intentionally deflects the course of the ball in any manner while running to first 
base.  The ball is dead and no runners may advance; 
(j) After a third strike or after he hits a fair ball, he or first base is tagged before he 
touches first base; 
(k) In running the last half of the distance from home base to first base, while the ball is 
being fielded to first base, he runs outside (to the right of) the three-foot line, or 
inside (to the left of) the foul line, and in the umpire’s judgment in so doing 
interferes with the fielder taking the throw at first base, in which case the ball is 
dead; except that he may run outside (to the right of) the three-foot line or inside (to 
the left of) the foul line to avoid a fielder attempting to field a batted ball; Rule 6.05 to 6.06 
51 
 Rule 6.05(k) Comment:  The lines marking the three-foot lane are a part of that lane and a batterrunner is required to have both feet within the three-foot lane or on the lines marking the lane.  The 
batter-runner is permitted to exit the three-foot lane by means of a step, stride, reach or slide in the 
immediate vicinity of first base for the sole purpose of touching first base. 
(l) An infielder intentionally drops a fair fly  ball or line drive, with first, first and 
second, first and third, or first, second and third base occupied before two are out.  
The ball is dead and runner or runners shall return to their original base or bases; 
APPROVED RULING:  In this situation, the batter is not out if the infielder permits 
the ball to drop untouched to the ground, except when the Infield Fly rule applies. 
(m) A preceding runner shall, in the umpire’s judgment, intentionally interfere with a 
fielder who is attempting to catch a thrown ball or to throw a ball in an attempt to 
complete any play: 
 Rule 6.05(m) Comment:  The objective of this rule is to penalize the offensive team for deliberate, 
unwarranted, unsportsmanlike action by the runner in leaving the baseline for the obvious purpose of 
crashing the pivot man on a double play, rather than trying to reach the base.  Obviously this is an 
umpire’s judgment play. 
(n) With two out, a runner on third base, and two strikes on the batter, the runner 
attempts to steal home base on a legal pitch and the ball touches the runner in the 
batter’s strike zone.  The umpire shall call “Strike Three,” the batter is out and the 
run shall not count; before two are out, the umpire shall call “Strike Three,” the ball 
is dead, and the run counts. 
(o) A member of his team (other than a runner) hinders a fielder’s attempt to catch or 
field a batted ball.  See Rule 7.11.  For interference by a runner, see Rule 7.08(b). 
6.06  A batter is out for illegal action when— 
(a) He hits a ball with one or both feet on the ground entirely outside the batter’s box. 
 Rule 6.06(a) Comment:  If a batter hits a ball fair or foul while out of the batter’s box, he shall be 
called out.  Umpires should pay particular attention to the position of the batter’s feet if he attempts to hit 
the ball while he is being intentionally passed.  A batter cannot jump or step out of the batter’s box and 
hit the ball. 
(b) He steps from one batter’s box to the other while the pitcher is in position ready to 
pitch; Rule 6.06 to 6.07 
52 
(c) He interferes with the catcher’s fielding or throwing by stepping out of the batter’s 
box or making any other movement that hinders the catcher’s play at home base.  
EXCEPTION:  Batter is not out if any runner attempting to advance is put out, or if 
runner trying to score is called out for batter’s interference. 
 Rule 6.06(c) Comment:  If the batter interferes with the catcher, the plate umpire shall call 
“interference.”  The batter is out and the ball dead.  No player may advance on such interference 
(offensive interference) and all runners must return to the last base that was, in the judgment of the 
umpire, legally touched at the time of the interference. 
 If, however, the catcher makes a play and the runner attempting to advance is put out, it is to be 
assumed there was no actual interference and that runner is out--not the batter.  Any other runners on the 
base at the time may advance as the ruling is that there is no actual interference if a runner is retired. In 
that case play proceeds just as if no violation had been called. 
 If a batter strikes at a ball and misses and swings so hard he carries the bat all the way around and, 
in the umpire’s judgment, unintentionally hits the catcher or the ball in back of him on the backswing 
before the catcher has securely held the ball, it shall be called a strike only (not interference).  The ball 
will be dead, however, and no runner shall advance on the play. 
(d) He uses or attempts to use a bat that, in the umpire’s judgment, has been altered or 
tampered with in such a way to improve the distance factor or cause an unusual 
reaction on the baseball.  This includes, bats that are filled, flat-surfaced, nailed, 
hollowed, grooved or covered with a substance such as paraffin, wax, etc. 
 No advancement on the bases will be allowed and any out or outs made during a 
play shall stand. 
 In addition to being called out, the player shall be ejected from the game and may 
be subject to additional penalties as determined by his League President. 
 Rule 6.06(d) Comment:  A batter shall be deemed to have used or attempted to use an illegal bat if 
he brings such a bat into the batter’s box. 
6.07  BATTING OUT OF TURN. 
(a) A batter shall be called out, on appeal, when he fails to bat in his proper turn, and 
another batter completes a time at bat in his place. 
 (1) The proper batter may take his place in the batter’s box at any time before the 
improper batter becomes a runner or is put out, and any balls and strikes shall 
be counted in the proper batter’s time at bat. 
(b) When an improper batter becomes a runner or is put out, and the defensive team 
appeals to the umpire before the first pitch to the next batter of either team, or 
before any play or attempted play, the umpire shall (1) declare the proper batter out; Rule 6.07 
53 
and (2) nullify any advance or score made because of a ball batted by the improper 
batter or because of the improper batter’s advance to first base on a hit, an error, a 
base on balls, a hit batter or otherwise. 
NOTE:  If a runner advances, while the improper batter is at bat, on a stolen base, 
balk, wild pitch or passed ball, such advance is legal. 
(c) When an improper batter becomes a runner or is put out, and a pitch is made to the 
next batter of either team before an appeal is made, the improper batter thereby 
becomes the proper batter, and the results of his time at bat become legal. 
(d) (1) When the proper batter is called out because he has failed to bat in turn, the 
next batter shall be the batter whose name follows that of the proper batter 
thus called out; 
(2)  When an improper batter becomes a proper batter because no appeal is made 
before the next pitch, the next batter shall be the batter whose name follows 
that of such legalized improper batter. The instant an improper batter’s actions 
are legalized, the batting order picks up with the name following that of the 
legalized improper batter. 
 Rule 6.07 Comment:  The umpire shall not direct the attention of any person to the presence in the 
batter’s box of an improper batter. This rule is designed to require constant vigilance by the players and 
managers of both teams. 
 There are two fundamentals to keep in mind:  When a player bats out of turn, the proper batter is 
the player called out.  If an improper batter bats and reaches base or is out and no appeal is made before a 
pitch to the next batter, or before any play or attempted play, that improper batter is considered to have 
batted in proper turn and establishes the order that is to follow. 
APPROVED RULING 
 To illustrate various situations arising from batting out of turn, assume a first-inning batting order 
as follows: 
 Abel-Baker-Charles-Daniel-Edward-Frank-George-Hooker-Irwin. 
 PLAY (1).  Baker bats.  With the count 2 balls and 1 strike, (a) the offensive team discovers the 
error or (b) the defensive team appeals.  RULING:  In either case, Abel replaces Baker, with the count on 
him 2 balls and 1 strike. 
 PLAY (2).  Baker bats and doubles.  The defensive team appeals (a) immediately or (b) after a 
pitch to Charles.  RULING:  (a) Abel is called out and Baker is the proper batter; (b) Baker stays on 
second and Charles is the proper batter. 
 PLAY (3).  Abel walks.  Baker walks.  Charles forces Baker.  Edward bats in Daniel’s turn.  While 
Edward is at bat, Abel scores and Charles goes to second on a wild pitch.  Edward grounds out, sending 
Charles to third.  The defensive team appeals (a) immediately or (b) after a pitch to Daniel.  RULING: 
(a) Abel’s run counts and Charles is entitled to second base since these advances were not made because 
of the improper batter batting a ball or advancing to first base.  Charles must return to second base 
because his advance to third resulted from the improper batter batting a ball.  Daniel is called out, and 
Edward is the proper batter; (b) Abel’s run counts and Charles stays on third.  The proper batter is Frank. Rule 6.07 to 6.08 
54 
 PLAY (4).  With the bases full and two out. Hooker bats in Frank’s turn, and triples, scoring three 
runs.  The defensive team appeals (a) immediately, or (b) after a pitch to George.  RULING: (a) Frank is 
called out and no runs score.  George is the proper batter to lead off the second inning; (b) Hooker stays 
on third and three runs score.  Irwin is the proper batter. 
 PLAY (5).  After Play (4)(b) above, George continues at bat. (a) Hooker is picked off third base 
for the third out, or (b) George flies out, and no appeal is made. Who is the proper leadoff batter in the 
second inning?  RULING:  (a) Irwin. He became the proper batter as soon as the first pitch to George 
legalized Hooker’s triple; (b) Hooker.  When no appeal was made, the first pitch to the leadoff batter of 
the opposing team legalized George’s time at bat. 
 PLAY (6).  Daniel walks and Abel comes to bat.  Daniel was an improper batter, and if an appeal 
is made before the first pitch to Abel, Abel is out, Daniel is removed from base, and Baker is the proper 
batter.  There is no appeal, and a pitch is made to Abel. Daniel’s walk is now legalized, and Edward 
thereby becomes the proper batter.  Edward can replace Abel at any time before Abel is put out or 
becomes a runner.  He does not do so.  Abel flies out, and Baker comes to bat.  Abel was an improper 
batter, and if an appeal is made before the first pitch to Baker, Edward is out, and the proper batter is 
Frank.  There is no appeal, and a pitch is made to Baker.  Abel’s out is now legalized, and the proper 
batter is Baker.  Baker walks.  Charles is the proper batter.  Charles flies out.  Now Daniel is the proper 
batter, but he is on second base.  Who is the proper batter?  RULING:  The proper batter is Edward. 
When the proper batter is on base, he is passed over, and the following batter becomes the proper batter. 
6.08  The batter becomes a runner and is entitled to first base without liability to be put 
out (provided he advances to and touches first base) when— 
(a) Four “balls” have been called by the umpire; 
 Rule 6.08(a) Comment:  A batter who is entitled to first base because of a base on balls must go to 
first base and touch the base before other base runners are forced to advance.  This applies when bases 
are full and applies when a substitute runner is put into the game. 
 If, in advancing, the base runner thinks there is a play and he slides past the base before or after 
touching it he may be put out by the fielder tagging him.  If he fails to touch the base to which he is 
entitled and attempts to advance beyond that base he may be put out by tagging him or the base he 
missed. 
(b) He is touched by a pitched ball which he is not attempting to hit unless (1) The ball 
is in the strike zone when it touches the batter, or (2) The batter makes no attempt to 
avoid being touched by the ball; 
 If the ball is in the strike zone when it touches the batter, it shall be called a strike, 
whether or not the batter tries to avoid the ball. If the ball is outside the strike zone 
when it touches the batter, it shall be called a ball if he makes no attempt to avoid 
being touched. 
APPROVED RULING:  When the batter is touched by a pitched ball which does 
not entitle him to first base, the ball is dead and no runner may advance. Rule 6.08 to 6.09 
55 
(c) The catcher or any fielder interferes with him.  If a play follows the interference, the 
manager of the offense may advise the plate umpire that he elects to decline the 
interference penalty and accept the play.  Such election shall be made immediately 
at the end of the play.  However, if the batter reaches first base on a hit, an error, a 
base on balls, a hit batsman, or otherwise, and all other runners advance at least one 
base, the play proceeds without reference to the interference. 
 Rule 6.08(c) Comment:  If catcher’s interference is called with a play in progress the umpire will 
allow the play to continue because the manager may elect to take the play.  If the batter-runner missed 
first base, or a runner misses his next base, he shall be considered as having reached the base, as stated in 
Note of Rule 7.04 (d). 
 Examples of plays the manager might elect to take: 
 1.  Runner on third, one out, batter hits fly ball to the outfield on which the runner scores but 
catcher’s interference was called.  The offensive manager may elect to take the run and have batter called 
out or have runner remain at third and batter awarded first base. 
 2.  Runner on second base.  Catcher interferes with batter as he bunts ball fairly sending runner to 
third base.  The manager may rather have runner on third base with an out on the play than have runners 
on second and first. 
 If a runner is trying to score by a steal or squeeze from third base, note the additional penalty set 
forth in Rule 7.07. 
 If the catcher interferes with the batter before the pitcher delivers the ball, it shall not be considered 
interference on the batter under Rule 6.08(c).  In such cases, the umpire shall call “Time” and the pitcher 
and batter start over from “scratch.” 
(d) A fair ball touches an umpire or a runner on fair territory before touching a fielder. 
 If a fair ball touches an umpire after having passed a fielder other than the pitcher, 
or having touched a fielder, including the pitcher, the ball is in play. 
6.09  The batter becomes a runner when— 
(a) He hits a fair ball; 
(b) The third strike called by the umpire is not caught, providing (1) first base is 
unoccupied, or (2) first base is occupied with two out; 
 Rule 6.09(b) Comment:  A batter who does not realize his situation on a third strike not caught, 
and who is not in the process of running to first base, shall be declared out once he leaves the dirt circle 
surrounding home plate.  
(c) A fair ball, after having passed a fielder other than the pitcher, or after having been 
touched by a fielder, including the pitcher, shall touch an umpire or runner on fair 
territory; Rule 6.09 to 6.10 
56 
(d) A fair ball passes over a fence or into the stands at a distance from home base of 
250 feet or more.  Such hit entitles the batter to a home run when he shall have 
touched all bases legally.  A fair fly ball that passes out of the playing field at a 
point less than 250 feet from home base shall entitle the batter to advance to second 
base only; 
(e) A fair ball, after touching the ground, bounds into the stands, or passes through, 
over or under a fence, or through or under a scoreboard, or through or under 
shrubbery, or vines on the fence, in which case the batter and the runners shall be 
entitled to advance two bases; 
(f) Any fair ball which, either before or after touching the ground, passes through or 
under a fence, or through or under a scoreboard, or through any opening in the fence 
or scoreboard, or through or under shrubbery, or vines on the fence, or which sticks 
in a fence or scoreboard, in which case the batter and the runners shall be entitled to 
two bases; 
(g) Any bounding fair ball is deflected by the fielder into the stands, or over or under a 
fence on fair or foul territory, in which case the batter and all runners shall be 
entitled to advance two bases; 
(h) Any fair fly ball is deflected by the fielder into the stands, or over the fence into foul 
territory, in which case the batter shall be entitled to advance to second base; but if 
deflected into the stands or over the fence in fair territory, the batter shall be entitled 
to a home run.  However, should such a fair fly be deflected at a point less than 250 
feet from home plate, the batter shall be entitled to two bases only. 
6.10  Any League may elect to use Rule 6.10(b), which shall be called the Designated 
Hitter Rule. 
(a) In the event of inter-league competition between clubs of leagues using the 
Designated Hitter Rule and clubs of leagues not using the Designated Hitter Rule, 
the rule will be used as follows: 
 (1) In World Series or exhibition games, the rule will be used or not used as is the 
practice of the league of the home team. 
 (2) In All-Star games, the rule will only be used if both teams and both Leagues 
so agree. Rule 6.10 
57 
(b) The Designated Hitter Rule provides as follows: 
 (1) A hitter may be designated to bat for the starting pitcher  and all subsequent 
pitchers in any game without otherwise affecting the status of the pitcher(s) in 
the game.  A Designated Hitter for the pitcher, if any, must be selected prior to 
the game and must be included in the lineup cards presented to the Umpire-inChief.  If a manager lists 10 players in his team’s lineup card, but fails to 
indicate one as the Designated Hitter, and an umpire or either manager (or 
designee of either manager who presents his team’s lineup card) notices the 
error before the umpire-in-chief calls “Play” to start the game, the umpirein-chief shall direct the manager who had made the omission to designate 
which of the nine players, other than the pitcher, will be the Designated 
Hitter. 
 Rule 6.10(b)(1) Comment:  A correction of a failure to indicate a Designated Hitter when 10 
players are listed in a batting order is an “obvious” error that may be corrected before a game starts.  See 
Rule 4.01 Comment. 
 (2) The Designated Hitter named in the starting lineup must come to bat at least 
one time, unless the opposing club changes pitchers. 
 (3) It is not mandatory that a club designate a hitter for the pitcher, but failure to 
do so prior to the game precludes the use of a Designated Hitter for that club 
for that game. 
 (4) Pinch-hitters for a Designated Hitter may be used.  Any substitute hitter for a 
Designated Hitter becomes the Designated Hitter.  A replaced Designated 
Hitter shall not re-enter the game in any capacity. 
 (5) The Designated Hitter may be used on defense, continuing to bat in the same 
position in the batting order, but the pitcher must then bat in the place of the 
substituted defensive player, unless more than one substitution is made, and 
the manager then must designate their spots in the batting order. 
 (6) A runner may be substituted for the Designated Hitter and the runner assumes 
the role of Designated Hitter.  A Designated Hitter may not pinch-run. 
 (7) A Designated Hitter is “locked”  into the batting order.  No multiple 
substitutions may be made that will alter the batting rotation of the Designated 
Hitter. Rule 6.10 
58 
 (8) Once the game pitcher is switched from the mound to a position on defense, 
such move shall terminate the Designated Hitter role for that club for the 
remainder of the game. 
 (9) Once a pinch-hitter bats for any player in the batting order and then enters the 
game to pitch, such move shall terminate the Designated Hitter role for that 
club for the remainder of the game. 
 (10) Once the game pitcher bats for the Designated Hitter, such move shall 
terminate the Designated Hitter role for that club for the remainder of the 
game.  The game pitcher may pinch-hit only for the Designated Hitter. 
 (11) If a manager lists 10 players in his team’s lineup card, but fails to indicate 
one as the Designated Hitter, and the opposing manager brings the failure to 
list a Designated Hitter to the attention of the umpire-in-chief after the game 
starts, then 
(i) the pitcher will be required to bat in the batting order in the place of 
the listed player who has not assumed a position on defense, if the 
team has taken the field on defense, or 
(ii) if the team has not yet taken the field on defense, the pitcher will be 
placed in the batting order in place of any player, as chosen by the 
manager of that team. 
In either case, the player whom the pitcher replaces in the batting order shall 
be considered to have been substituted for and is removed from the game 
and the Designated Hitter role for that club shall be terminated for the 
remainder of the game.  Any play that occurred before the violation is 
brought to the attention of the umpire-in-chief shall count, subject to Rule 
6.07 (Batting Out of Turn). 
 (12) Once a Designated Hitter assumes a position on defense, such move shall 
terminate the Designated Hitter role for that club for the remainder of the 
game. 
 (13) A substitute for the Designated Hitter need not be announced until it is the 
Designated Hitter’s turn to bat. Rule 6.10 
59 
 (14) If a player on defense goes to the mound (i.e., replaces the pitcher), this 
move shall terminate the Designated Hitter’s role for that club for the 
remainder of the game. 
 (15) The Designated Hitter may not sit in the bullpen unless serving as a catcher 
in the bullpen. Rule 7.01 to 7.04 
60 
7.00—The Runner.
7.01  A runner acquires the right to an unoccupied base when he touches it before he is out. 
He is then entitled to it until he is put out, or forced to vacate it for another runner legally 
entitled to that base. 
 Rule 7.01 Comment:  If a runner legally acquires title to a base, and the pitcher assumes his 
pitching position, the runner may not return to a previously occupied base. 
7.02 In advancing, a runner shall touch first, second, third and home base in order.  If 
forced to return, he shall retouch all bases in reverse order, unless the ball is dead under any 
provision of Rule 5.09.  In such cases, the runner may go directly to his original base. 
7.03
(a) Two runners may not occupy a base, but if, while the ball is alive, two runners are 
touching a base, the following runner shall be out when tagged and the preceding 
runner is entitled to the base, unless Rule 7.03(b) applies. 
(b) If a runner is forced to advance by reason of the batter becoming a runner and 
two runners are touching a base to which the following runner is forced, the 
following runner is entitled to the base and the preceding runner shall be out 
when tagged or when a fielder possesses the ball and touches the base to which 
such preceding runner is forced. 
7.04  Each runner, other than the batter, may without liability to be put out, advance one 
base when— 
(a) There is a balk; 
(b) The batter’s advance without liability to be put out forces the runner to vacate his 
base, or when the batter hits a fair ball that touches another runner or the umpire 
before such ball has been touched by, or has passed a fielder, if the runner is forced 
to advance; 
 Rule 7.04(b) Comment:  A runner forced to advance without liability to be put out may advance 
past the base to which he is entitled only at his peril.  If such a runner, forced to advance, is put out for 
the third out before a preceding runner, also forced to advance, touches home plate, the run shall score. 
 Play.  Two out, bases full, batter walks but runner from second is overzealous and runs past third 
base toward home and is tagged out on a throw by the catcher.  Even though two are out, the run would 
score on the theory that the run was forced home by the base on balls and that all the runners needed to 
do was proceed and touch the next base. Rule 7.04 to 7.05 
61 
(c) A fielder, after catching a fly ball, falls into a bench or stand, or falls across ropes 
into a crowd when spectators are on the field; 
 Rule 7.04(c) Comment:  If a fielder, after having made a legal catch, should fall into a stand or 
among spectators or into the dugout or any other out-of-play area while in possession of the ball after 
making a legal catch, or fall while in the dugout after making a legal catch, the ball is dead and each 
runner shall advance one base, without liability to be put out, from his last legally touched base at the 
time the fielder fell into, or in, such out-of-play area. 
(d) While he is attempting to steal a base, the batter is interfered with by the catcher or 
any other fielder. 
 NOTE:  When a runner is entitled to a base without liability to be put out, while the 
ball is in play, or under any rule in which the ball is in play after the runner reaches 
the base to which he is entitled, and the runner fails to touch the base to which he is 
entitled before attempting to advance to the next base, the runner shall forfeit his 
exemption from liability to be put out, and he may be put out by tagging the base or 
by tagging the runner before he returns to the missed base; 
(e) A fielder deliberately touches a pitched ball with his cap, mask or any part of his 
uniform detached from its proper place on his person.  The ball is in play, and the 
award is made from the position of the runner at the time the ball was touched. 
7.05  Each runner including the batter-runner may, without liability to be put out, 
advance— 
(a) To home base, scoring a run, if a fair ball goes out of the playing field in flight and 
he touched all bases legally; or if a fair ball which, in the umpire’s judgment, would 
have gone out of the playing field in flight, is deflected by the act of a fielder in 
throwing his glove, cap, or any article of his apparel; 
(b) Three bases, if a fielder deliberately touches a fair ball with his cap, mask or any 
part of his uniform detached from its proper place on his person.  The ball is in play 
and the batter may advance to home base at his peril; 
(c) Three bases, if a fielder deliberately throws his glove at and touches a fair ball. The 
ball is in play and the batter may advance to home base at his peril. 
(d) Two bases, if a fielder deliberately touches a thrown ball with his cap, mask or any 
part of his uniform detached from its proper place on his person.  The ball is in play; Rule 7.05 
62 
(e) Two bases, if a fielder deliberately throws his glove at and touches a thrown ball.  
The ball is in play; 
 Rule 7.05(b) through 7.05(e) Comment:  In applying (b-c-d-e) the umpire must rule that the 
thrown glove or detached cap or mask has touched the ball.  There is no penalty if the ball is not touched. 
 Under (c-e) this penalty shall not be invoked against a fielder whose glove is carried off his hand 
by the force of a batted or thrown ball, or when his glove flies off his hand as he makes an obvious effort 
to make a legitimate catch. 
(f) Two bases, if a fair ball bounces or is deflected into the stands outside the first or 
third base foul lines; or if it goes through or under a field fence, or through or under 
a scoreboard, or through or under shrubbery or vines on the fence; or if it sticks in 
such fence, scoreboard, shrubbery or vines; 
(g) Two bases when, with no spectators on the playing field, a thrown ball goes into the 
stands, or into a bench (whether or not the ball rebounds into the field), or over or 
under or through a field fence, or on a slanting part of the screen above the 
backstop, or remains in the meshes of a wire screen protecting spectators. The ball 
is dead.  When such wild throw is the first play by an infielder, the umpire, in 
awarding such bases, shall be governed by the position of the runners at the time the 
ball was pitched; in all other cases the umpire shall be governed by the position of 
the runners at the time the wild throw was made; 
APPROVED RULING:  If all runners, including the batter-runner, have advanced 
at least one base when an infielder makes a wild throw on the first play after the 
pitch, the award shall be governed by the position of the runners when the wild 
throw was made. 
 Rule 7.05(g) Comment:  In certain circumstances it is impossible to award a runner two bases. 
Example:  Runner on first.  Batter hits fly to short right.  Runner holds up between first and second and 
batter comes around first and pulls up behind him.  Ball falls safely.  Outfielder, in throwing to first, 
throws ball into stand. 
 APPROVED RULING:  Since no runner, when the ball is dead, may advance beyond the base to 
which he is entitled, the runner originally on first base goes to third base and the batter is held at second 
base. 
 The term “when the wild throw was made” means when the throw actually left the player’s hand 
and not when the thrown ball hit the ground, passes a receiving fielder or goes out of play into the stands. 
 The position of the batter-runner at the time the wild throw left the thrower’s hand is the key in 
deciding the award of bases.  If the batter-runner has not reached first base, the award is two bases at the 
time the pitch was made for all runners.  The decision as to whether the batter-runner has reached first 
base before the throw is a judgment call. 
 If an unusual play arises where a first throw by an infielder goes into stands or dugout but the 
batter did not become a runner (such as catcher throwing ball into stands in attempt to get runner from 
third trying to score on passed ball or wild pitch) award of two bases shall be from the position of the 
runners at the time of the throw.  (For the purpose of Rule 7.05 (g) a catcher is considered an infielder.) Rule 7.05 to 7.06 
63 
 PLAY.  Runner on first base, batter hits a ball to the shortstop, who throws to second base too late 
to get runner at second, and second baseman throws toward first base after batter has crossed first base. 
Ruling—Runner at second scores.  (On this play, only if batter-runner is past first base when throw is 
made is he awarded third base.) 
(h) One base, if a ball, pitched to the batter, or thrown by the pitcher from his position 
on the pitcher’s plate to a base to catch a runner, goes into a stand or a bench, or 
over or through a field fence or backstop.  The ball is dead; 
 APPROVED RULING:  When a wild pitch or passed ball goes through or by the 
catcher, or deflects off the catcher, and goes directly into the dugout, stands, above 
the break, or any area where the ball is dead, the awarding of bases shall be one 
base.  One base shall also be awarded if the pitcher while in contact with the rubber, 
throws to a base, and the throw goes directly into the stands or into any area where 
the ball is dead. 
  If, however, the pitched or thrown ball goes through or by the catcher or through the 
fielder, and remains on the playing field,  and is subsequently kicked or deflected 
into the dugout, stands or other area where the ball is dead, the awarding of bases 
shall be two bases from position of runners at the time of the pitch or throw. 
(i) One base, if the batter becomes a runner on Ball Four or Strike Three, when the 
pitch passes the catcher and lodges in the umpire’s mask or paraphernalia. 
 If the batter becomes a runner on a wild pitch which entitles the runners to advance 
one base, the batter-runner shall be entitled to first base only. 
 Rule 7.05(i) Comment:  The fact a runner is awarded a base or bases without liability to be put out 
does not relieve him of the responsibility to touch the base he is awarded and all intervening bases.  For 
example:  batter hits a ground ball which an infielder throws into the stands but the batter-runner missed 
first base.  He may be called out on appeal for missing first base after the ball is put in play even though 
he was “awarded” second base. 
 If a runner is forced to return to a base after a catch, he must retouch his original base even though, 
because of some ground rule or other rule, he is awarded additional bases.  He may retouch while the ball 
is dead and the award is then made from his original base. 
7.06  When obstruction occurs, the umpire shall call or signal “Obstruction.” 
(a) If a play is being made on the obstructed runner, or if the batter-runner is obstructed 
before he touches first base, the ball is dead and all runners shall advance, without 
liability to be put out, to the bases they would have reached, in the umpire’s 
judgment, if there had been no obstruction.  The obstructed runner shall be awarded 
at least one base beyond the base he had last legally touched before the obstruction. Rule 7.06 to 7.08 
64 
Any preceding runners, forced to advance by the award of bases as the penalty for 
obstruction, shall advance without liability to be put out. 
 Rule 7.06(a) Comment:  When a play is being made on an obstructed runner, the umpire shall 
signal obstruction in the same manner that he calls “Time,” with both hands overhead.  The ball is 
immediately dead when this signal is given; however, should a thrown ball be in flight before the 
obstruction is called by the umpire, the runners are to be awarded such bases on wild throws as they 
would have been awarded had not obstruction occurred.  On a play where a runner was trapped between 
second and third and obstructed by the third baseman going into third base while the throw is in flight 
from the shortstop, if such throw goes into the dugout the obstructed runner is to be awarded home base. 
Any other runners on base in this situation would also be awarded two bases from the base they last 
legally touched before obstruction was called. 
(b) If no play is being made on the obstructed runner, the play shall proceed until no 
further action is possible.  The umpire shall then call “Time” and impose such 
penalties, if any, as in his judgment will nullify the act of obstruction. 
 Rule 7.06(b) Comment:  Under 7.06(b) when the ball is not dead on obstruction and an obstructed 
runner advances beyond the base which, in the umpire’s judgment, he would have been awarded because 
of being obstructed, he does so at his own peril and may be tagged out.  This is a judgment call. 
 NOTE:  The catcher, without the ball in his possession, has no right to block the pathway of the 
runner attempting to score.  The base line belongs to the runner and the catcher should be there only 
when he is fielding a ball or when he already has the ball in his hand. 
7.07 If, with a runner on third base and trying to score by means of a squeeze play or a 
steal, the catcher or any other fielder steps on, or in front of home base without possession 
of the ball, or touches the batter or his bat, the pitcher shall be charged with a balk, the batter 
shall be awarded first base on the interference and the ball is dead. 
7.08  Any runner is out when— 
(a) (1) He runs more than three feet away from his baseline to avoid being tagged 
unless his action is to avoid interference with a fielder fielding a batted ball.  A 
runner’s baseline is established when the tag attempt occurs and is a straight 
line from the runner to the base he is attempting to reach safely; or 
 (2) after touching first base, he leaves the baseline, obviously abandoning his 
effort to touch the next base; 
 Rule 7.08(a) Comment:  Any runner after reaching first base who leaves the baseline heading for 
his dugout or his position believing that there is no further play, may be declared out if the umpire judges 
the act of the runner to be considered abandoning his efforts to run the bases.  Even though an out is 
called, the ball remains in play in regard to any other runner. 
 This rule also covers the following and similar plays:  Less than two out, score tied last of ninth 
inning, runner on first, batter hits a ball out of park for winning run, the runner on first passes second and Rule 7.08 
65 
thinking the home run automatically wins the game, cuts across diamond toward his bench as 
batter-runner circles bases.  In this case, the base runner would be called out “for abandoning his effort to 
touch the next base” and batter-runner permitted to continue around bases to make his home run valid.  If 
there are two out, home run would not count (see Rule 7.12).  This is not an appeal play. 
 PLAY.  Runner believing he is called out on a tag at first or third base starts for the dugout and 
progresses a reasonable distance still indicating by his actions that he is out, shall be declared out for 
abandoning the bases. 
(b) He intentionally interferes with a thrown ball; or hinders a fielder attempting to 
make a play on a batted ball; 
 Rule 7.08(b) Comment:  A runner who is adjudged to have hindered a fielder who is attempting to 
make a play on a batted ball is out whether it was intentional or not. 
 If, however, the runner has contact with a legally occupied base when he hinders the fielder, he 
shall not be called out unless, in the umpire’s judgment, such hindrance, whether it occurs on fair or foul 
territory, is intentional.  If the umpire declares the hindrance intentional, the following penalty shall 
apply:  With less than two out, the umpire shall declare both the runner and batter out. With two out, the 
umpire shall declare the batter out. 
 If, in a run-down between third base and home plate, the succeeding runner has advanced and is 
standing on third base when the runner in a run-down is called out for offensive interference, the umpire 
shall send the runner standing on third base back to second base.  This same principle applies if there is a 
run-down between second and third base and succeeding runner has reached second (the reasoning is 
that no runner shall advance on an interference play and a runner is considered to occupy a base until he 
legally has reached the next succeeding base). 
(c) He is tagged, when the ball is alive, while off his base.  EXCEPTION:  A 
batter-runner cannot be tagged out after overrunning or oversliding first base if he 
returns immediately to the base; 
 APPROVED RULING:  (1) If the impact of a runner breaks a base loose from its 
position, no play can be made on that runner at that base if he had reached the base 
safely. 
 APPROVED RULING:  (2) If a base is dislodged from its position during a play, 
any following runner on the same play shall be considered as touching or occupying 
the base if, in the umpire’s judgment, he touches or occupies the point marked by 
the dislodged bag. 
(d) He fails to retouch his base after a fair or foul ball is legally caught before he, or his 
base, is tagged by a fielder.  He shall not be called out for failure to retouch his base 
after the first following pitch, or any play or attempted play.  This is an appeal play; 
 Rule 7.08(d) Comment:  Runners need not “tag up” on a foul tip.  They may steal on a foul tip.  If 
a so-called tip is not caught, it becomes an ordinary foul.  Runners then return to their bases. Rule 7.08 
66 
(e) He or the next base is tagged before he touches the next base, after he has been 
forced to advance by reason of the batter becoming a runner.  However, if a 
following runner is put out on a force play, the force is removed and the runner 
must be tagged to be put out.  The force is removed as soon as the runner touches 
the base to which he is forced to advance, and if he overslides or overruns the base, 
the runner must be tagged to be put out.  However, if the forced runner, after 
touching the next base, retreats for any reason towards the base he had last 
occupied, the force play is reinstated, and he can again be put out if the defense tags 
the base to which he is forced; 
 Rule 7.08(e) Comment:  PLAY.  Runner on first and three balls on batter:  Runner steals on the 
next pitch, which is fourth ball, but after having touched second he overslides or overruns that base. 
Catcher’s throw catches him before he can return.  Ruling is that runner is out.  (Force out is removed.) 
 Oversliding and overrunning situations arise at bases other than first base.  For instance, before 
two are out, and runners on first and second, or first, second and third, the ball is hit to an infielder who 
tries for the double play.  The runner on first beats the throw to second base but overslides the base.  The 
relay is made to first base and the batter-runner is out.  The first baseman, seeing the runner at second 
base off the bag, makes the return throw to second and the runner is tagged off the base.  Meanwhile 
runners have crossed the plate.  The question is:  Is this a force play?  Was the force removed when the 
batter-runner was out at first base?  Do the runs that crossed the plate during this play and before the 
third out was made when the runner was tagged at second, count?  Answer:  The runs score.  It is not a 
force play.  It is a tag play. 
(f) He is touched by a fair ball in fair territory before the ball has touched or passed an 
infielder.  The ball is dead and no runner may score, nor runners advance, except 
runners forced to advance.  EXCEPTION:  If a runner is touching his base when 
touched by an Infield Fly, he is not out, although the batter is out; 
 Rule 7.08(f) Comment:  If two runners are touched by the same fair ball, only the first one is out 
because the ball is instantly dead. 
 If runner is touched by an Infield Fly when he is not touching his base, both runner 
and batter are out. 
(g) He attempts to score on a play in which the batter interferes with the play at home 
base before two are out.  With two out, the interference puts the batter out and no 
score counts; 
(h) He passes a preceding runner before such runner is out; 
(i) After he has acquired legal possession of a base, he runs the bases in reverse order 
for the purpose of confusing the defense or making a travesty of the game. The 
umpire shall immediately call “Time” and declare the runner out; Rule 7.08 to 7.09 
67 
 Rule 7.08(i) Comment: If a runner touches an unoccupied base and then thinks the ball was caught 
or is decoyed into returning to the base he last touched, he may be put out running back to that base, but 
if he reaches the previously occupied base safely he cannot be put out while in contact with that base. 
(j) He fails to return at once to first base after overrunning or oversliding that base. If 
he attempts to run to second he is out when tagged. If, after overrunning or 
oversliding first base he starts toward the dugout, or toward his position, and fails to 
return to first base at once, he is out, on appeal, when he or the base is tagged; 
 Rule 7.08(j) Comment:  Runner who touches first base in overrunning and is declared safe by the 
umpire has, within the intent of Rule 4.09(a) “reached first base” and any run which scores on such a 
play counts, even though the runner subsequently becomes the third out for failure to return “at once,” as 
covered in Rule 7.08(j). 
(k) In running or sliding for home base, he fails to touch home base and makes no 
attempt to return to the base, when a fielder holds the ball in his hand, while 
touching home base, and appeals to the umpire for the decision. 
 Rule 7.08(k) Comment:  This rule applies only where runner is on his way to the bench and the 
catcher would be required to chase him.  It does not apply to the ordinary play where the runner misses 
the plate and then immediately makes an effort to touch the plate before being tagged.  In that case, 
runner must be tagged. 
(l) A play on him is being made and a member of his team (other than a runner) 
hinders a fielder’s attempt to field a thrown ball.  See Rule 7.11.  For interference by 
a runner, see Rule 7.08(b). 
7.09  It is interference by a batter or a runner when— 
(a) After a third strike he hinders the catcher in his attempt to field the ball; 
(b) He intentionally deflects the course of a foul ball in any manner; 
(c) Before two are out and a runner on third base, the batter hinders a fielder in making 
a play at home base; the runner is out; 
(d) Any member or members of the offensive team stand or gather around any base to 
which a runner is advancing, to confuse,  hinder or add to the difficulty of the 
fielders.  Such runner shall be declared out for the interference of his teammate or 
teammates; Rule 7.09 
68 
(e) Any batter or runner who has just been put out, or any runner who has just scored, 
hinders or impedes any following play being made on a runner.  Such runner shall 
be declared out for the interference of his teammate; 
 Rule 7.09(e) Comment:  If the batter or a runner continues to advance after he has been put out, he 
shall not by that act alone be considered as confusing, hindering or impeding the fielders. 
(f) If, in the judgment of the umpire, a base runner willfully and deliberately interferes 
with a batted ball or a fielder in the act of fielding a batted ball with the obvious 
intent to break up a double play, the ball is dead.  The umpire shall call the runner 
out for interference and also call out the batter-runner because of the action of his 
teammate.  In no event may bases be run or runs scored because of such action by a 
runner. 
(g) If, in the judgment of the umpire, a  batter-runner willfully and deliberately 
interferes with a batted ball or a fielder in the act of fielding a batted ball, with the 
obvious intent to break up a double play, the ball is dead; the umpire shall call the 
batter-runner out for interference and shall also call out the runner who had 
advanced closest to the home plate regardless where the double play might have 
been possible. In no event shall bases be run because of such interference. 
(h) In the judgment of the umpire, the base coach at third base, or first base, by 
touching or holding the runner, physically assists him in returning to or leaving third 
base or first base. 
(i) With a runner on third base, the base coach leaves his box and acts in any manner to 
draw a throw by a fielder; 
(j) He fails to avoid a fielder who is attempting to field a batted ball, or intentionally 
interferes with a thrown ball, provided that if two or more fielders attempt to field a 
batted ball, and the runner comes in contact with one or more of them, the umpire 
shall determine which fielder is entitled to the benefit of this rule, and shall not 
declare the runner out for coming in contact with a fielder other than the one the 
umpire determines to be entitled to field such a ball; 
 Rule 7.09(j) Comment:  When a catcher and batter-runner going to first base have contact when 
the catcher is fielding the ball, there is generally no violation and nothing should be called. “Obstruction” 
by a fielder attempting to field a ball should be called only in very flagrant and violent cases because the 
rules give him the right of way, but of course such “right of way” is not a license to, for example, 
intentionally trip a runner even though fielding the ball.  If the catcher is fielding the ball and the first 
baseman or pitcher obstructs a runner going to first base “obstruction” shall be called and the base runner 
awarded first base. Rule 7.09 to 7.10 
69 
(k) A fair ball touches him on fair territory before touching a fielder.  If a fair ball goes 
through, or by, an infielder, and touches a runner immediately back of him, or 
touches the runner after having been deflected by a fielder, the umpire shall not 
declare the runner out for being touched by a batted ball.  In making such decision 
the umpire must be convinced that the ball passed through, or by, the fielder, and 
that no other infielder had the chance to make a play on the ball.  If, in the judgment 
of the umpire, the runner deliberately and intentionally kicks such a batted ball on 
which the infielder has missed a play, then the runner shall be called out for 
interference. 
 PENALTY FOR INTERFERENCE:  The runner is out and the ball is dead. 
7.10  Any runner shall be called out, on appeal, when— 
(a) After a fly ball is caught, he fails to retouch his original base before he or his 
original base is tagged; 
 Rule 7.10(a) Comment:  “Retouch,” in this rule, means to tag up and start from a contact with the 
base after the ball is caught.  A runner is not permitted to take a flying start from a position in back of his 
base. 
(b) With the ball in play, while advancing or returning to a base, he fails to touch each 
base in order before he, or a missed base, is tagged. 
 APPROVED RULING:  (1) No runner may return to touch a missed base after a 
following runner has scored.  (2) When the ball is dead, no runner may return to 
touch a missed base or one he has left after he has advanced to and touched a base 
beyond the missed base. 
 Rule 7.10(b) Comment:  PLAY.  (a) Batter hits ball out of park or ground rule double and misses 
first base (ball is dead)—he may return to first base to correct his mistake before he touches second but if 
he touches second he may not return to first and if defensive team appeals he is declared out at first. 
 PLAY.  (b) Batter hits ball to shortstop who throws wild into stand (ball is dead)—batter-runner 
misses first base but is awarded second base on the overthrow. Even though the umpire has awarded the 
runner second base on the overthrow, the runner must touch first base before he proceeds to second base. 
 These are appeal plays. 
(c) He overruns or overslides first base and fails to return to the base immediately, and 
he or the base is tagged; 
(d) He fails to touch home base and makes no attempt to return to that base, and home 
base is tagged. Rule 7.10 to 7.11 
70 
 Any appeal under this rule must be made before the next pitch, or any play or 
attempted play. If the violation occurs during a play which ends a half-inning, the 
appeal must be made before the defensive team leaves the field. 
 An appeal is not to be interpreted as a play or an attempted play. 
 Successive appeals may not be made on a runner at the same base.  If the defensive 
team on its first appeal errs, a request for a second appeal on the same runner at the 
same base shall not be allowed by the umpire. (Intended meaning of the word “err” 
is that the defensive team in making an appeal threw the ball out of play. For 
example, if the pitcher threw to first base to appeal and threw the ball into the 
stands, no second appeal would be allowed.) 
 Appeal plays may require an umpire to recognize an apparent “fourth out.”  If the 
third out is made during a play in which an appeal play is sustained on another 
runner, the appeal play decision takes precedence in determining the out.  If there is 
more than one appeal during a play that ends a half-inning, the defense may elect to 
take the out that gives it the advantage. For the purpose of this rule, the defensive 
team has “left the field” when the pitcher and all infielders have left fair territory on 
their way to the bench or clubhouse. 
 Rule 7.10 Comment:  If two runners arrive at home base about the same time and the first runner 
misses home plate but a second runner legally touches the plate, the runner is tagged out on his attempt 
to come back and touch the base or is called out, on appeal, then he shall be considered as having been 
put out before the second runner scored and being the third out.  Second runner’s run shall not count, as 
provided in Rule 7.12. 
 If a pitcher balks when making an appeal, such act shall be a play.  An appeal should be clearly 
intended as an appeal, either by a verbal request by the player or an act that unmistakably indicates an 
appeal to the umpire.  A player, inadvertently stepping on the base with a ball in his hand, would not 
constitute an appeal.  Time is not out when an appeal is being made. 
7.11 The players, coaches or any member of a team at bat shall vacate any space 
(including both dugouts or bullpens) needed by a fielder who is attempting to field a batted 
or thrown ball.  If a member of the team at bat (other than a runner) hinders a fielder’s 
attempt to catch or field a batted ball, the ball is dead, the batter is declared out and all 
runners return to the bases occupied at the time of the pitch.  If a member of the team at 
bat (other than a runner) hinders a fielder’s attempt to field a thrown ball, the ball is dead, 
the runner on whom the play is being made shall be declared out and all runners return to 
the last legally occupied base at the time of the interference. Rule 7.12 
71 
7.12 Unless two are out, the status of a following runner is not affected by a preceding 
runner’s failure to touch or retouch a base.  If, upon appeal, the preceding runner is the third 
out, no runners following him shall score.  If such third out is the result of a force play, 
neither preceding nor following runners shall score. 
   Rule 8.01 
72 
8.00—The Pitcher.
8.01 Legal pitching delivery.  There are two legal pitching positions, the Windup 
Position and the Set Position, and either position may be used at any time. 
 Pitchers shall take signs from the catcher while in contact with the pitcher’s plate. 
 Rule 8.01 Comment:  Pitchers may disengage the rubber after taking their signs but may not step 
quickly onto the rubber and pitch.  This may be judged a quick pitch by the umpire.  When the pitcher 
disengages the rubber, he must drop his hands to his sides. 
 Pitchers will not be allowed to disengage the rubber after taking each sign. 
(a) The Windup Position.  The pitcher shall stand facing the batter, his pivot foot in 
contact with the pitcher’s plate and the other foot free.  From this position any 
natural movement associated with his delivery of the ball to the batter commits him 
to the pitch without interruption or alteration.  He shall not raise either foot from the 
ground, except that in his actual delivery of the ball to the batter, he may take one 
step backward, and one step forward with his free foot. 
 When a pitcher holds the ball with both hands in front of his body, with his pivot 
foot in contact with the pitcher’s plate and his other foot free, he will be considered 
in the Windup Position. 
 Rule 8.01(a) Comment:  In the Windup Position, a pitcher is permitted to have his “free” foot on 
the rubber, in front of the rubber, behind the rubber or off the side of the rubber. 
 From the Windup Position, the pitcher may: 
 (1) deliver the ball to the batter, or 
 (2) step and throw to a base in an attempt to pick-off a runner, or 
 (3) disengage the rubber (if he does he must drop his hand to his sides). 
 In disengaging the rubber the pitcher must step off with his pivot foot and not his free foot first. 
 He may not go into a set or stretch position—if he does it is a balk. 
(b) The Set Position.  Set Position shall be indicated by the pitcher when he stands 
facing the batter with his pivot foot in contact with, and his other foot in front of, the 
pitcher’s plate, holding the ball in both hands in front of his body and coming to a 
complete stop.  From such Set Position he may deliver the ball to the batter, throw 
to a base or step backward off the pitcher’s plate with his pivot foot.  Before 
assuming Set Position, the pitcher may elect to make any natural preliminary 
motion such as that known as “the stretch.”  But if he so elects, he shall come to Set 
Position before delivering the ball to the batter.  After assuming Set Position, any 
natural motion associated with his delivery of the ball to the batter commits him to 
the pitch without alteration or interruption. Rule 8.01 
73 
 Preparatory to coming to a set position, the pitcher shall have one hand on his side; 
from this position he shall go to his set position as defined in Rule 8.01(b) without 
interruption and in one continuous motion. 
 The pitcher, following his stretch, must (a) hold the ball in both hands in front of his 
body and (b) come to a complete stop.  This must be enforced.  Umpires should 
watch this closely.  Pitchers are constantly attempting to “beat the rule” in their 
efforts to hold runners on bases and in cases where the pitcher fails to make a 
complete “stop” called for in the rules, the umpire should immediately call a 
“Balk.” 
 Rule 8.01(b) Comment:  With no runners on base, the pitcher is not required to come to a 
complete stop when using the Set Position.  If, however, in the umpire’s judgment, a pitcher delivers 
the ball in a deliberate effort to catch the batter off guard, this delivery shall be deemed a quick pitch, 
for which the penalty is a ball.  See Rule 8.05(e) Comment. 
(c) At any time during the pitcher’s preliminary movements and until his natural 
pitching motion commits him to the pitch, he may throw to any base provided he 
steps directly toward such base before making the throw. 
 Rule 8.01(c) Comment:  The pitcher shall step “ahead of the throw.”  A snap throw followed by 
the step directly toward the base is a balk. 
(d) If the pitcher makes an illegal pitch with the bases unoccupied, it shall be called a 
ball unless the batter reaches first base on a hit, an error, a base on balls, a hit batter 
or otherwise. 
 Rule 8.01(d) Comment:  A ball which slips out of a pitcher’s hand and crosses the foul line shall 
be called a ball; otherwise it will be called no pitch.  This would be a balk with men on base. 
(e) If the pitcher removes his pivot foot from contact with the pitcher’s plate by 
stepping backward with that foot, he thereby becomes an infielder and if he makes a 
wild throw from that position, it shall be considered the same as a wild throw by 
any other infielder. 
 Rule 8.01(e) Comment:  The pitcher, while off the rubber, may throw to any base.  If he makes a 
wild throw, such throw is the throw of an infielder and what follows is governed by the rules covering a 
ball thrown by a fielder. 
(f) A pitcher must indicate visually to the umpire-in-chief, the batter and any runners 
the hand with which he intends to pitch, which may be done by wearing his glove 
on the other hand while touching the pitcher’s plate.  The pitcher is not permitted 
to pitch with the other hand until the batter is retired, the batter becomes a runner, Rule 8.01 to 8.02 
74 
the inning ends, the batter is substituted for by a pinch-hitter or the pitcher incurs 
an injury.  In the event a pitcher switches pitching hands during an at-bat because 
he has suffered an injury, the pitcher may not, for the remainder of the game, 
pitch with the hand from which he has switched.  The pitcher shall not be given 
the opportunity to throw any preparatory pitches after switching pitching hands.  
Any change of pitching hands must be indicated clearly to the umpire-in-chief. 
8.02  The pitcher shall not— 
(a) (1) While in the 18-foot circle surrounding the pitcher’s plate, touch the ball after 
touching his mouth or lips, or touch his mouth or lips while he is in contact 
with the pitcher’s plate.  The pitcher must clearly wipe the fingers of his 
pitching hand dry before touching the ball or the pitcher’s plate.  
EXCEPTION:  Provided it is agreed to by both managers, the umpire prior to 
the start of a game played in cold weather, may permit the pitcher to blow on 
his hand. 
 PENALTY:  For violation of this part of this rule the umpires shall immediately call 
a ball.  However, if the pitch is made and a batter reaches first base on a hit, an 
error, a hit batsman or otherwise, and no other runner is put out before advancing at 
least one base, the play shall proceed without reference to the violation.  Repeat 
offenders shall be subject to a fine by the League President. 
 (2) expectorate on the ball, either hand or his glove; 
 (3) rub the ball on his glove, person or clothing; 
 (4) apply a foreign substance of any kind to the ball; 
 (5) deface the ball in any manner; or 
 (6) deliver a ball altered in a manner prescribed by Rule 8.02(a)(2) through (5) or 
what is called the “shine” ball, “spit” ball, “mud” ball or “emery” ball. The 
pitcher is allowed to rub the ball between his bare hands. 
  PENALTY:  For violation of any part of Rules 8.02 (a)(2) through (6): 
  (a) The pitcher shall be ejected immediately from the game and shall be 
suspended automatically.  In National Association Leagues, the 
automatic suspension shall be for 10 games. Rule 8.02 
75 
  (b) If a play follows the violation called by the umpire, the manager of the 
team at bat may advise the umpire-in-chief that he elects to accept the 
play.  Such election shall be made immediately at the end of the play. 
However, if the batter reaches first base on a hit, an error, a base on balls, 
a hit batsman, or otherwise, and no other runner is put out before 
advancing at least one base, the play shall proceed without reference to 
the violation. 
  (c) Even though the team at bat elects to take the play, the violation shall be 
recognized and the penalties in subsection (a) will still be in effect. 
  (d) If the manager of the team at bat does not elect to accept the play, the 
umpire-in-chief shall call an automatic ball and, if there are any runners 
on base, a balk. 
  (e) The umpire shall be sole judge on whether any portion of this rule has 
been violated. 
 Rules 8.02(a)(2) through 8.02(a)(6) Comment:  If a pitcher violates either Rule 8.02(a)(2) or 
Rule 8.02(a)(3) and, in the judgment of the umpire, the pitcher did not intend, by his act, to alter the 
characteristics of a pitched ball, then the umpire may, in his discretion, warn the pitcher in lieu of 
applying the penalty set forth for violations of Rules 8.02(a)(2) through 8.02(a)(6).  If the pitcher 
persists in violating either of those Rules, however, the umpire should then apply the penalty. 
 Rule 8.02(a) Comment:  If at any time the ball hits the rosin bag it is in play.  In the case of rain or 
wet field, the umpire may instruct the pitcher to carry the rosin bag in his hip pocket.  A pitcher may use 
the rosin bag for the purpose of applying rosin to his bare hand or hands.  Neither the pitcher nor any 
other player shall dust the ball with the rosin bag; neither shall the pitcher nor any other player be 
permitted to apply rosin from the bag to his glove or dust any part of his uniform with the rosin bag. 
(b) Have on his person, or in his possession, any foreign substance.  For such infraction 
of this section (b) the penalty shall be immediate ejection from the game.  In 
addition, the pitcher shall be suspended  automatically.  In National Association 
Leagues, the automatic suspension shall be for 10 games. 
(c) Intentionally delay the game by throwing the ball to players other than the catcher, 
when the batter is in position, except in an attempt to retire a runner. 
 PENALTY:  If, after warning by the umpire, such delaying action is repeated, the 
pitcher shall be removed from the game. Rule 8.02 to 8.04 
76 
(d)  Intentionally Pitch at the Batter. 
If, in the umpire’s judgment, such a violation occurs, the umpire may elect either to: 
1.     Expel the pitcher, or the manager and the pitcher, from the game, or 
2.     may warn the pitcher and the manager of both teams that another such pitch 
will result in the immediate expulsion of that pitcher (or a replacement) and 
the manager. 
If, in the umpire’s judgment, circumstances warrant, both teams may be officially 
“warned” prior to the game or at any time during the game. 
 (League Presidents may take additional action under authority provided in Rule 
9.05) 
 Rule 8.02(d) Comment:   Team personnel may not come onto the playing surface to argue or 
dispute a warning issued under Rule 8.02(d).  If a manager, coach or player leaves the dugout or his 
position to dispute a warning, he should be warned to stop.  If he continues, he is subject to ejection.
To pitch at a batter’s head is unsportsmanlike and highly dangerous.  It should be—and is—
condemned by everybody.  Umpires should act without hesitation in enforcement of this rule. 
8.03  When a pitcher takes his position at the beginning of each inning, or when he 
relieves another pitcher, he shall be permitted to pitch not to exceed eight preparatory 
pitches to his catcher during which play shall be suspended.  A league by its own action 
may limit the number of preparatory pitches to less than eight preparatory pitches.  Such 
preparatory pitches shall not consume more than one minute of time.  If a sudden 
emergency causes a pitcher to be summoned into the game without any opportunity to warm 
up, the umpire-in-chief shall allow him as many pitches as the umpire deems necessary. 
8.04  When the bases are unoccupied, the pitcher shall deliver the ball to the batter within 
12 seconds after he receives the ball.  Each time the pitcher delays the game by violating 
this rule, the umpire shall call “Ball.” 
 The 12-second timing starts when the pitcher is in possession of the ball and the 
batter is in the box, alert to the pitcher.  The timing stops when the pitcher releases the ball.  
 The intent of this rule is to avoid unnecessary delays.  The umpire shall insist that 
the catcher return the ball promptly to the pitcher, and that the pitcher take his position on 
the rubber promptly.  Obvious delay by the pitcher should instantly be penalized by the 
umpire. Rule 8.05 
77 
8.05  If there is a runner, or runners, it is a balk when— 
(a) The pitcher, while touching his plate, makes any motion naturally associated with 
his pitch and fails to make such delivery; 
 Rule 8.05(a) Comment:  If a lefthanded or righthanded pitcher swings his free foot past the back 
edge of the pitcher’s rubber, he is required to pitch to the batter except to throw to second base on a 
pick-off play. 
(b) The pitcher, while touching his plate, feints a throw to first base and fails to 
complete the throw; 
(c) The pitcher, while touching his plate, fails to step directly toward a base before 
throwing to that base; 
 Rule 8.05(c) Comment:  Requires the pitcher, while touching his plate, to step directly toward a 
base before throwing to that base.  If a pitcher turns or spins off of his free foot without actually stepping 
or if he turns his body and throws before stepping, it is a balk. 
 A pitcher is to step directly toward a base before throwing to that base but does not require him to 
throw (except to first base only) because he steps.  It is possible, with runners on first and third, for the 
pitcher to step toward third and not throw, merely to bluff the runner back to third; then seeing the runner 
on first start for second, turn and step toward and throw to first base.  This is legal.  However, if, with 
runners on first and third, the pitcher, while in contact with the rubber, steps toward third and then 
immediately and in practically the same motion “wheels” and throws to first base, it is obviously an 
attempt to deceive the runner at first base, and in such a move it is practically impossible to step directly 
toward first base before the throw to first base, and such a move shall be called a balk.  Of course, if the 
pitcher steps off the rubber and then makes such a move, it is not a balk. 
(d) The pitcher, while touching his plate, throws, or feints a throw to an unoccupied 
base, except for the purpose of making a play; 
(e) The pitcher makes an illegal pitch; 
 Rule 8.05(e) Comment:  A quick pitch is an illegal pitch. Umpires will judge a quick pitch as one 
delivered before the batter is reasonably set in the batter’s box.  With runners on base the penalty is a 
balk; with no runners on base, it is a ball.  The quick pitch is dangerous and should not be permitted. 
(f) The pitcher delivers the ball to the batter while he is not facing the batter; 
(g) The pitcher makes any motion naturally associated with his pitch while he is not 
touching the pitcher’s plate; 
(h) The pitcher unnecessarily delays the game; Rule 8.05 to 8.06 
78 
 Rule 8.05(h) Comment:  Rule 8.05(h) shall not apply when a warning is given pursuant to Rule 
8.02(c) (which prohibits intentional delay of a game by throwing to fielders not in an attempt to put a 
runner out).  If a pitcher is ejected pursuant to Rule 8.02(c) for continuing to delay the game, the penalty 
in Rule 8.05(h) shall also apply.  Rule 8.04 (which sets a time limit for a pitcher to deliver the ball when 
the bases are unoccupied) applies only when there are no runners on base.  
(i) The pitcher, without having the ball, stands on or astride the pitcher’s plate or while 
off the plate, he feints a pitch; 
(j) The pitcher, after coming to a legal pitching position, removes one hand from the 
ball other than in an actual pitch, or in throwing to a base; 
(k) The pitcher, while touching his plate, accidentally or intentionally drops the ball; 
(l) The pitcher, while giving an intentional base on balls, pitches when the catcher is 
not in the catcher’s box; 
(m) The pitcher delivers the pitch from Set Position without coming to a stop. 
 PENALTY:  The ball is dead, and each runner shall advance one base without 
liability to be put out, unless the batter reaches first on a hit, an error, a base on 
balls, a hit batter, or otherwise, and all other runners advance at least one base, in 
which case the play proceeds without reference to the balk. 
 APPROVED RULING:  In cases where a pitcher balks and throws wild, either to a 
base or to home plate, a runner or runners may advance beyond the base to which 
he is entitled at his own risk. 
 APPROVED RULING:  A runner who misses the first base to which he is 
advancing and who is called out on appeal shall be considered as having advanced 
one base for the purpose of this rule. 
 Rule 8.05 Comment:  Umpires should bear in mind that the purpose of the balk rule is to prevent 
the pitcher from deliberately deceiving the base runner.  If there is doubt in the umpire’s mind, the 
“intent” of the pitcher should govern.  However, certain specifics should be borne in mind: 
 (a) Straddling the pitcher’s rubber without the ball is to be interpreted as intent to deceive and 
ruled a balk. 
 (b) With a runner on first base the pitcher may make a complete turn, without hesitating toward 
first, and throw to second.  This is not to be interpreted as throwing to an unoccupied base. 
8.06  A professional league shall adopt the following rule pertaining to the visit of the 
manager or coach to the pitcher: Rule 8.06 
79 
(a) This rule limits the number of trips a manager or coach may make to any one 
pitcher in any one inning; 
(b) A second trip to the same pitcher in the same inning will cause this pitcher’s 
automatic removal from the game; 
(c) The manager or coach is prohibited from making a second visit to the mound while 
the same batter is at bat, but 
(d) if a pinch-hitter is substituted for this batter, the manager or coach may make a 
second visit to the mound, but must remove the pitcher from the game. 
 A manager or coach is considered to have concluded his visit to the mound when he 
leaves the 18-foot circle surrounding the pitcher’s rubber. 
 Rule 8.06 Comment:  If the manager or coach goes to the catcher or infielder and that player then 
goes to the mound or the pitcher comes to him at his position before there is an intervening play (a pitch 
or other play) that will be the same as the manager or coach going to the mound. 
 Any attempt to evade or circumvent this rule by the manager or coach going to the catcher or an 
infielder and then that player going to the mound to confer with the pitcher shall constitute a trip to the 
mound. 
 If the coach goes to the mound and removes a pitcher and then the manager goes to the mound to 
talk with the new pitcher, that will constitute one trip to that new pitcher that inning. 
 In a case where a manager has made his first trip to the mound and then returns the second time to 
the mound in the same inning with the same pitcher in the game and the same batter at bat, after being 
warned by the umpire that he cannot return to the mound, the manager shall be removed from the game 
and the pitcher required to pitch to the batter until he is retired or gets on base.  After the batter is retired, 
or becomes a base runner, then this pitcher must be removed from the game.  The manager should be 
notified that his pitcher will be removed from the game after he pitches to one hitter, so he can have a 
substitute pitcher warmed up. 
 The substitute pitcher will be allowed eight preparatory pitches or more if in the umpire’s 
judgment circumstances justify. Rule 9.01 to 9.02 
80 
9.00—The Umpire.
9.01  
(a) The league president shall appoint one or more umpires to officiate at each league 
championship game.  The umpires shall be responsible for the conduct of the game 
in accordance with these official rules and for maintaining discipline and order on 
the playing field during the game. 
(b) Each umpire is the representative of the league and of professional baseball, and is 
authorized and required to enforce all of these rules.  Each umpire has authority to 
order a player, coach, manager or club officer or employee to do or refrain from 
doing anything which affects the administering of these rules, and to enforce the 
prescribed penalties. 
(c) Each umpire has authority to rule on any point not specifically covered in these 
rules. 
(d) Each umpire has authority to disqualify any player, coach, manager or substitute for 
objecting to decisions or for unsportsmanlike conduct or language, and to eject such 
disqualified person from the playing field.  If an umpire disqualifies a player while a 
play is in progress, the disqualification shall not take effect until no further action is 
possible in that play. 
(e) Each umpire has authority at his discretion to eject from the playing field (1) any 
person whose duties permit his presence on the field, such as ground crew 
members, ushers, photographers, newsmen, broadcasting crew members, etc., and 
(2) any spectator or other person not authorized to be on the playing field. 
9.02  
(a) Any umpire’s decision which involves judgment, such as, but not limited to, 
whether a batted ball is fair or foul, whether a pitch is a strike or a ball, or whether a 
runner is safe or out, is final.  No player, manager, coach or substitute shall object to 
any such judgment decisions. 
 Rule 9.02(a) Comment:  Players leaving their position in the field or on base, or managers or 
coaches leaving the bench or coaches box, to argue on BALLS AND STRIKES will not be permitted. 
They should be warned if they start for the plate to protest the call. If they continue, they will be ejected 
from the game. Rule 9.02 
81 
(b) If there is reasonable doubt that any umpire’s decision may be in conflict with the 
rules, the manager may appeal the decision and ask that a correct ruling be made.  
Such appeal shall be made only to the umpire who made the protested decision. 
(c) If a decision is appealed, the umpire making the decision may ask another umpire 
for information before making a final decision.  No umpire shall criticize, seek to 
reverse or interfere with another umpire’s decision unless asked to do so by the 
umpire making it.  If the umpires consult after a play and change a call that had 
been made, then they have the authority to take all steps that they may deem 
necessary, in their discretion, to eliminate the results and consequences of the earlier 
call that they are reversing, including placing runners where they think those 
runners would have been after the play, had the ultimate call been made as the 
initial call, disregarding interference or obstruction that may have occurred on the 
play; failures of runners to tag up based upon the initial call on the field; runners 
passing other runners or missing bases; etc., all in the discretion of the umpires.  No 
player, manager or coach shall be permitted to argue the exercise of the umpires’ 
discretion in resolving the play and any person so arguing shall be subject to 
ejection. 
 Rule 9.02(c) Comment:  A manager is permitted to ask the umpires for an explanation of the 
play and how the umpires have exercised their discretion to eliminate the results and consequences of 
the earlier call that the umpires are reversing.  Once the umpires explain the result of the play, 
however, no one is permitted to argue that the umpires should have exercised their discretion in a 
different manner. 
 The manager or the catcher may request the plate umpire to ask his partner for help on a half swing 
when the plate umpire calls the pitch a ball, but not when the pitch is called a strike.  The manager may 
not complain that the umpire made an improper call, but only that he did not ask his partner for help.  
Field umpires must be alerted to the request from the plate umpire and quickly respond.  Managers may 
not protest the call of a ball or strike on the pretense they are asking for information about a half swing. 
 Appeals on a half swing may be made only on the call of ball and when asked to appeal, the home 
plate umpire must refer to a base umpire for his judgment on the half swing.  Should the base umpire call 
the pitch a strike, the strike call shall prevail. 
 Baserunners must be alert to the possibility that the base umpire on appeal from the plate umpire 
may reverse the call of a ball to the call of a strike, in which event the runner is in jeopardy of being out 
by the catcher’s throw.  Also, a catcher must be alert in a base stealing situation if a ball call is reversed 
to a strike by the base umpire upon appeal from the plate umpire. 
 The ball is in play on appeal on a half swing. 
 On a half swing, if the manager comes out to argue with first or third base umpire and if after 
being warned he persists in arguing, he can be ejected as he is now arguing over a called ball or strike. 
(d) No umpire may be replaced during a game unless he is injured or becomes ill. Rule 9.03 to 9.04 
82 
9.03  
(a) If there is only one umpire, he shall have complete jurisdiction in administering the 
rules.  He may take any position on the playing field which will enable him to 
discharge his duties (usually behind the catcher, but sometimes behind the pitcher if 
there are runners).  He shall be considered umpire-in-chief. 
(b) If there are two or more umpires, one shall be designated umpire-in-chief and the 
others field umpires. 
9.04  
(a) The umpire-in-chief shall stand behind the catcher. (He usually is called the plate 
umpire.) His duties shall be to: 
 (1) Take full charge of, and be responsible for, the proper conduct of the game; 
 (2) Call and count balls and strike; 
 (3) Call and declare fair balls and fouls except those commonly called by field 
umpires; 
 (4) Make all decisions on the batter; 
 (5) Make all decisions except those commonly reserved for the field umpires; 
 (6) Decide when a game shall be forfeited; 
 (7) If a time limit has been set, announce the fact and the time set before the game 
starts; 
 (8) Inform the official scorer of the official batting order, and any changes in the 
lineups and batting order, on request; 
 (9) Announce any special ground rules, at his discretion. 
(b) A field umpire may take any position on the playing field he thinks best suited to 
make impending decisions on the bases.  His duties shall be to: 
 (1) Make all decisions on the bases except those specifically reserved to the 
umpire-in-chief; Rule 9.04 to 9.05 
83 
 (2) Take concurrent jurisdiction with the umpire-in-chief in calling “Time,” balks, 
illegal pitches, or defacement or discoloration of the ball by any player. 
 (3) Aid the umpire-in-chief in every manner in enforcing the rules, and excepting 
the power to forfeit the game, shall have equal authority with the 
umpire-in-chief in administering and enforcing the rules and maintaining 
discipline. 
(c) If different decisions should be made on one play by different umpires, the 
umpire-in-chief shall call all the umpires  into consultation, with no manager or 
player present.  After consultation, the umpire-in-chief (unless another umpire may 
have been designated by the league president) shall determine which decision shall 
prevail, based on which umpire was in best position and which decision was most 
likely correct.  Play shall proceed as if only the final decision had been made. 
9.05  
(a) The umpire shall report to the league president within twelve hours after the end of 
a game all violations of rules and other incidents worthy of comment, including the 
disqualification of any trainer, manager, coach or player, and the reasons therefor. 
(b) When any trainer, manager, coach or player is disqualified for a flagrant offense 
such as the use of obscene or indecent language, or an assault upon an umpire, 
trainer, manager, coach or player, the umpire shall forward full particulars to the 
league president within four hours after the end of the game. 
(c) After receiving the umpire’s report that a trainer, manager, coach or player has been 
disqualified, the league president shall impose such penalty as he deems justified, 
and shall notify the person penalized and the manager of the club of which the 
penalized person is a member.  If the penalty includes a fine, the penalized person 
shall pay the amount of the fine to the league within five days after receiving notice 
of the fine.  Failure to pay such fine within five days shall result in the offender 
being debarred from participation in any  game and from sitting on the players’ 
bench during any game, until the fine is paid. 
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS TO UMPIRES
 Umpires, on the field, should not indulge in conversation with players.  Keep out of the coaching 
box and do not talk to the coach on duty. 
 Keep your uniform in good condition.  Be active and alert on the field. 
 Be courteous, always, to club officials; avoid visiting in club offices and thoughtless familiarity 
with officers or employees of contesting clubs. Rule 9.05 
84 
 When you enter a ball park your sole duty is to umpire a ball game as the representative of 
baseball. 
 Do not allow criticism to keep you from studying out bad situations that may lead to protested 
games.  Carry your rule book.  It is better to consult the rules and hold up the game ten minutes to decide 
a knotty problem than to have a game thrown out on protest and replayed. 
 Keep the game moving.  A ball game is often helped by energetic and earnest work of the umpires. 
 You are the only official representative of baseball on the ball field.  It is often a trying position 
which requires the exercise of much patience and good judgment, but do not forget that the first essential 
in working out of a bad situation is to keep your own temper and self-control. 
 You no doubt are going to make mistakes, but never attempt to “even up” after having made one. 
Make all decisions as you see them and forget which is the home or visiting club. 
 Keep your eye everlastingly on the ball while it is in play.  It is more vital to know just where a fly 
ball fell, or a thrown ball finished up, than whether or not a runner missed a base.  Do not call the plays 
too quickly, or turn away too fast when a fielder is throwing to complete a double play.  Watch out for 
dropped balls after you have called a man out. 
 Do not come running with your arm up or down, denoting “out” or “safe.”  Wait until the play is 
completed before making any arm motion. 
 Each umpire team should work out a simple set of signals, so the proper umpire can always right a 
manifestly wrong decision when convinced he has made an error.  If sure you got the play correctly, do 
not be stampeded by players’ appeals to “ask the other man.”  If not sure, ask one of your associates.  Do 
not carry this to extremes, be alert and get your own plays.  But remember!  The first requisite is to get 
decisions correctly.  If in doubt don’t hesitate to consult your associate.  Umpire dignity is important but 
never as important as “being right.” 
 Most important rule for umpires is always “BE IN POSITION TO SEE EVERY PLAY.”  Even 
though your decision may be 100% right, players still question it if they feel you were not in a spot to see 
the play clearly and definitely. 
 Finally, be courteous, impartial and firm, and so compel respect from all. Rule 10.01 
85 
THE RULES OF SCORING
Index
Appeal of scoring decision, 10.01(a) 
Assists, 10.10 
Base hits, 10.05, 10.06 
Bases on balls, 10.14 
Batting out of turn, 10.01(b)(4), 
10.03(d) 
Box scores, 10.02, 10.03(b) 
Box scores, how to prove, 10.03(c) 
Called game, 10.03(e) 
Caught stealing, 10.07(h) 
Cumulative performance records 
guidelines, 10.23 
Defensive indifference, 10.07(g) 
Determining value of base hits, 10.06 
Double plays, 10.11 
Earned runs, 10.16 
Errors, 10.12 
Fielder’s choice, 2.00, 10.12(f)(2) 
Forfeited game, 10.03(e) 
Game-ending hits, 10.06(f), 10.06(g) 
Individual championships, how 
determined, 10.22 
League President, definition, 2.00
Official scorer, 10.01 
Ordinary effort, definition, 2.00 
Oversliding, definition, 2.00 
Passed balls, 10.13 
Percentages, how determined, 10.21 
Protested game, 10.01(b)(3) 
Putouts, 10.09 
Report, 10.02, 10.03 
Runs allowed, 10.16 
Runs batted in, 10.04 
Sacrifices, 10.08 
Saves for relief pitchers, 10.19 
Shutouts, 10.18 
Statistics, 10.20 
Stolen bases, 10.07 
Streaks, how determined, 10.22 
Strikeouts, 10.15 
Substitutes, 10.03(b) 
Suspended game, 10.01(b)(3), 10.23(d) 
Triple plays, 10.11 
Wild pitches, 10.13 
Winning and losing pitcher, 10.17 
10.00—The Official Scorer.
10.01 OFFICIAL SCORER (GENERAL RULES)
(a) The League President shall appoint an official scorer for each league championship, 
post-season or all-star game.  The official scorer shall observe the game from a 
position in the press box.  The official scorer shall have sole authority to make all 
decisions concerning application of Rule 10 that involve judgment, such as whether 
a batter’s advance to first base is the result of a hit or an error.  The official scorer 
shall communicate such decisions to the press box and broadcasting booths by hand Rule 10.01 
86 
signals or over the press box loudspeaker system and shall advise the public address 
announcer of such decisions, if requested.  
 The official scorer shall make all decisions concerning judgment calls within 24 
hours after a game concludes or is suspended.  A player or club may request that the 
League President review a judgment call of an official scorer made in a game in 
which such player or club participated, by notifying the League President in writing 
or by approved electronic means within 24 hours of the conclusion or suspension of 
such game, or within 24 hours of the official scorer’s call, in the event the official 
scorer changes a call within 24 hours after  a game concludes or is suspended, as 
provided in this Rule 10.01(a).  The party requesting review shall submit, before the 
close of the second business day of the league office following the request for 
review, any written explanation or other evidence (such as videotapes or electronic 
media) the player or club wishes the League President to consider in reviewing such 
request.  The League President shall not consider any evidence submitted after the 
time for submission set forth in this Rule 10.01(a).  The League President, after 
considering the evidence submitted and any other evidence he wishes to consider, 
may request that the official scorer change a judgment call or, if the League 
President concludes that the judgment of the official scorer had been clearly 
erroneous, may order a change in a judgment call.  No judgment decision shall be 
changed thereafter.  A league may impose a reasonable fee upon a party requesting 
such review in the event that the judgment call of the official scorer being reviewed 
is upheld. 
 After each game, including forfeited and called games, the official scorer shall 
prepare a report, on a form prescribed by the League President, listing the date of 
the game, where it was played, the names of the competing clubs and the umpires, 
the full score of the game and all records of individual players compiled according 
to the system specified in this Rule 10.   The official scorer shall forward this report 
to the league office as soon as practicable after the game ends.  The official scorer 
shall forward the report of any suspended game as soon as practicable after the 
game has been completed, or after it becomes a called game because it cannot be 
completed, as provided by the Rule 4.12(b)(4). 
 Rule 10.01(a) Comment:  The official scorer shall forward the official score report to the league 
statistician instead of to the league office, if requested to do so by the league.  In the event of any 
discrepancy in records maintained by a league statistician and the rulings by an official scorer, the report 
of such official scorer shall control.  League statisticians and official scorers should consult cooperatively 
to resolve any discrepancies.   Rule 10.01 to 10.02 
87 
 For the Major Leagues, the duties of a League President are carried out by one or more designees 
of the Commissioner of Baseball.  See Rule 2.00 (League President) Comment. 
(b) (1) In all cases, the official scorer shall not make a scoring decision that is in 
conflict with Rule 10 or any other Official Baseball Rule.  The official scorer 
shall conform strictly to the rules of scoring set forth in this Rule 10. The 
official scorer shall not make any decision that conflicts with an umpire’s 
decision.  The official scorer shall have authority to rule on any point not 
specifically covered in these rules.  The League President shall order changed 
any decision of an official scorer that contradicts the rules of scoring set forth 
in this Rule 10 and shall take whatever remedial actions as may be necessary 
to correct any statistics that need correction as a result of such mistaken 
scoring decision. 
 (2) If the teams change sides before three men are put out, the official scorer shall 
immediately inform the umpire-in-chief of the mistake. 
 (3) If the game is protested or suspended, the official scorer shall make a note of 
the exact situation at the time of the protest or suspension, including the score, 
the number of outs, the position of any runners, the ball-and-strike count on 
the batter, the lineups of both teams and the players who have been removed 
from the game for each team. 
 Rule 10.01(b)(3) Comment:  It is important that a suspended game resume with exactly the same 
situation as existed at the time of suspension.  If a protested game is ordered replayed from the point of 
protest, the game must be resumed with exactly the situation that existed just before the protested play. 
 (4) The official scorer shall not call the attention of any umpire or of any member 
of either team to the fact that a player is batting out of turn. 
(c) The official scorer is an official representative of the league, is entitled to the 
respect and dignity of his office and shall be accorded full protection by the League 
President.  The official scorer shall report to the League President any indignity 
expressed by any manager, player, club employee or club officer in the course of, or 
as the result of, the discharge of official scorer duties. 
10.02 OFFICIAL SCORE REPORT
 The official score report prepared by the official scorer shall be in a form prescribed 
by the league and shall include: Rule 10.02 
88 
(a) The following records for each batter and runner: 
(1) Number of times batted, except that no time at bat shall be charged when a 
player 
 (i) hits a sacrifice bunt or sacrifice fly; 
 (ii) is awarded first base on four called balls; 
 (iii) is hit by a pitched ball; or 
 (iv) is awarded first base because of interference or obstruction; 
(2) Number of runs scored; 
(3) Number of safe hits; 
(4) Number of runs batted in; 
(5) Two-base hits; 
(6) Three-base hits; 
(7) Home runs; 
(8) Total bases on safe hits; 
(9) Stolen bases; 
(10) Sacrifice bunts; 
(11) Sacrifice flies; 
(12) Total number of bases on balls; 
(13) Separate listing of any intentional bases on balls; 
(14) Number of times hit by a pitched ball; 
(15) Number of times awarded first base for interference or obstruction; 
(16) Strikeouts; 
(17) Number of force double plays and reverse-force double plays grounded into; 
and 
 Rule 10.02(a)(17) Comment:  The official scorer should not charge a batter with grounding into a 
double play if the batter-runner is called out due to interference by a preceding runner. 
(18) Number of times caught stealing. 
(b) The following records for each fielder: 
(1) Number of putouts; 
(2) Number of assists; 
(3) Number of errors; 
(4) Number of double plays participated in; and 
(5) Number of triple plays participated in. Rule 10.02 
89 
(c) The following records for each pitcher: 
(1) Number of innings pitched; 
 Rule 10.02(c)(1) Comment:  In computing innings pitched, the official scorer shall count each 
putout as ? of an inning.  For example, if a starting pitcher is replaced with one out in the sixth inning, 
the official scorer shall credit that pitcher with 5? innings.  If a starting pitcher is replaced with none out 
in the sixth inning, the official scorer shall credit that pitcher with 5 innings and make the notation that 
that pitcher faced _____ batters in the sixth, noting the number of batters faced.  If a relief pitcher retires 
two batters and is replaced, the official scorer shall credit that pitcher with ? of an inning pitched.  If a 
relief pitcher enters a game and his team initiates a successful appeal play that results in one out, the 
officer scorer shall credit such relief pitcher with ? of an inning pitched. 
(2) Total number of batters faced; 
(3) Number of batters officially at bat against pitcher, computed according to Rule 
10.02(a)(1); 
(4) Number of hits allowed; 
(5) Number of runs allowed; 
(6) Number of earned runs allowed; 
(7) Number of home runs allowed; 
(8) Number of sacrifice hits allowed; 
(9) Number of sacrifice flies allowed; 
(10) Total number of bases on balls allowed; 
(11) Separate listing of any intentional bases on balls allowed; 
(12) Number of batters hit by pitched balls; 
(13) Number of strikeouts; 
(14) Number of wild pitches; and 
(15) Number of balks. 
(d) The following additional data: 
(1) Name of the winning pitcher; 
(2) Name of the losing pitcher; 
(3) Names of the starting pitcher and the finishing pitcher for each team; and 
(4) Name of pitcher credited with a save, if any. 
(e) Number of passed balls allowed by each catcher. 
(f) Name of players participating in double plays and triple plays. 
 Rule 10.02(f) Comment: For example, an official scorer would note: “Double Plays—Jones, 
Roberts and Smith (2).  Triple Play—Jones and Smith.” Rule 10.02 to 10.03 
90 
(g) Number of runners left on base by each team.  This total shall include all runners 
who get on base by any means and who do not score and are not put out.  The 
official scorer shall include in this total a batter-runner whose batted ball results in 
another runner being retired for the third out. 
(h) Names of batters who hit home runs with the bases full. 
(i) Number of outs when winning run scored, if the game was won in the last 
half-inning. 
(j) The score by innings for each team. 
(k) Names of umpires, listed in this order: plate umpire, first-base umpire, second-base 
umpire, third-base umpire, left-field umpire (if any) and right-field umpire (if any). 
(l) Time required to play the game, with delays deducted for weather, light failure or 
technological failure not related to game action. 
 Rule 10.02(l) Comment:  A delay to attend to the injury of a player, manager, coach or umpire 
shall be counted in computing time of game. 
(m) Official attendance, as provided by the home club.  
10.03 OFFICIAL SCORE REPORT (ADDITIONAL RULES)
(a) In compiling the official score report, the official scorer shall list each player’s 
name and fielding position, or positions, in the order in which the player batted, or 
would have batted if the game ended before the player came to bat. 
 Rule 10.03(a) Comment:  When a player does not exchange positions with another fielder but is 
merely placed in a different spot for a particular batter (for example, if a second baseman goes to the 
outfield to form a four-man outfield, or if a third baseman moves to a position between the shortstop and 
second baseman), the official scorer should not list this as a new position. 
(b) The official scorer shall identify in the official score report any player who enters 
the game as a substitute batter or substitute runner, whether or not such player 
continues in the game thereafter, in the batting order by a special symbol that shall 
refer to a separate record of substitute batters and runners.  The record of substitute 
batters shall describe what the substitute batter did.  The record of substitute batters 
and runners shall include the name of any such substitute whose name is 
announced, but who is removed for another substitute before he actually gets into Rule 10.03 
91 
the game.  Any such second substitute shall be recorded as batting or running for 
the first announced substitute. 
 Rule 10.03(b) Comment:  Lower case letters are recommended as symbols for substitute batters 
and numerals are recommended as symbols for substitute runners.  For example, an official score report 
may note as follows: “a-Singled for Abel in third inning; b-Flied out for Baker in sixth inning; c-Hit into 
force for Charles in seventh inning; d-Grounded out for Daniel in ninth inning; 1-Ran for Edward in 
ninth inning.”  If a substitute’s name is announced but the substitute is removed for another substitute 
before he actually gets into the game, the official scorer report shall record the substitute, for example, as 
follows: “e-Announced as substitute for Frank in seventh inning.” 
(c) HOW TO PROVE A BOX SCORE.  A box score shall balance (or is proven) when 
the total of the team’s times at bat, bases on balls received, hit batters, sacrifice 
bunts, sacrifice flies and batters awarded first base because of interference or 
obstruction equals the total of that team’s runs, players left on base and the 
opposing team’s putouts. 
(d) WHEN PLAYER BATS OUT OF TURN.  When a player bats out of turn and is 
put out, and the proper batter is called out before the ball is pitched to the next 
batter, the official scorer shall charge the proper batter with a time at bat and score 
the putout and any assists the same as if the correct batting order had been followed. 
If an improper batter becomes a runner and the proper batter is called out for having 
missed his turn at bat, the official scorer shall charge the proper batter with a time at 
bat, credit the putout to the catcher and ignore everything entering into the improper 
batter’s safe arrival on base.  If more than one batter bats out of turn in succession, 
the official scorer shall score all plays just as they occur, skipping the turn at bat of 
the player or players who first missed batting in the proper order. 
(e) CALLED AND FORFEITED GAMES. 
(1) If a regulation game is called, the official scorer shall include the record of all 
individual and team actions up to the moment the game ends, as defined in 
Rules 4.10 and 4.11. If the game is a tie game, the official scorer shall not 
enter a winning or losing pitcher. 
(2) If a regulation game is forfeited, the official scorer shall include the record of 
all individual and team actions up to the time of forfeit.  If the winning team 
by forfeit is ahead at the time of forfeit, the official scorer shall enter as 
winning and losing pitchers the players who would have qualified as the 
winning and losing pitchers if the game had been called at the time of forfeit.  
If the winning team by forfeit is behind or if the score is tied at the time of Rule 10.03 to 10.04  
92 
forfeit, the official scorer shall not enter a winning or losing pitcher.  If a game 
is forfeited before it becomes a regulation game, the official scorer shall 
include no records and shall report only the fact of the forfeit. 
 Rule 10.03(e) Comment:  The official scorer shall not consider that, by rule, the score of a 
forfeited game is 9 to 0 (see Rule 2.00 (Forfeited Game)), notwithstanding the results on the field at the 
point the game is forfeited.
10.04 RUNS BATTED IN
 A run batted in is a statistic credited to a batter whose action at bat causes one or 
more runs to score, as set forth in this Rule 10.04.   
(a) The official scorer shall credit the batter with a run batted in for every run that 
scores  
(1) unaided by an error and as part of a play begun by the batter’s safe hit 
(including the batter’s home run), sacrifice bunt, sacrifice fly, infield out or 
fielder’s choice, unless Rule 10.04(b) applies; 
(2)  by reason of the batter becoming a runner with the bases full (because of a 
base on balls, an award of first base for being touched by a pitched ball or for 
interference or obstruction); or
(3) when, before two are out, an error is made on a play on which a runner from 
third base ordinarily would score. 
(b) The official scorer shall not credit a run batted in 
(1) when the batter grounds into a force double play or a reverse-force double 
play; or 
(2) when a fielder is charged with an error because the fielder muffs a throw at 
first base that would have completed a force double play. 
(c) The official scorer’s judgment must determine whether a run batted in shall be 
credited for a run that scores when a fielder holds the ball or throws to a wrong 
base. Ordinarily, if the runner keeps going, the official scorer should credit a run 
batted in; if the runner stops and takes off again when the runner notices the 
misplay, the official scorer should credit the run as scored on a fielder’s choice. Rule 10.05 
93 
10.05 BASE HITS
 A base hit is a statistic credited to a batter when such batter reaches base safely, as 
set forth in this Rule 10.05. 
(a) The official scorer shall credit a batter with a base hit when: 
(1) the batter reaches first base (or any succeeding base) safely on a fair ball that 
settles on the ground, that touches a fence before being touched by a fielder or 
that clears a fence; 
(2) the batter reaches first base safely on a fair ball hit with such force, or so 
slowly, that any fielder attempting to make a play with the ball has no 
opportunity to do so; 
 Rule 10.05(a)(2) Comment:  The official scorer shall credit a hit if the fielder attempting to handle 
the ball cannot make a play, even if such fielder deflects the ball from or cuts off another fielder who 
could have put out a runner. 
(3) the batter reaches first base safely on a fair ball that takes an unnatural bounce 
so that a fielder cannot handle it with ordinary effort, or that touches the 
pitcher’s plate or any base (including home plate) before being touched by a 
fielder and bounces so that a fielder cannot handle the ball with ordinary 
effort;
(4) the batter reaches first base safely on a fair ball that has not been touched by a 
fielder and that is in fair territory when the ball reaches the outfield, unless in 
the scorer’s judgment the ball could have been handled with ordinary effort; 
(5) a fair ball that has not been touched by a fielder touches a runner or an umpire, 
unless a runner is called out for having been touched by an Infield Fly, in 
which case the official scorer shall not score a hit; or 
(6) a fielder unsuccessfully attempts to put out a preceding runner and, in the 
official scorer’s judgment, the batter-runner would not have been put out at 
first base by ordinary effort. 
 Rule 10.05(a) Comment:  In applying Rule 10.05(a), the official scorer shall always give the batter 
the benefit of the doubt.  A safe course for the official scorer to follow is to score a hit when 
exceptionally good fielding of a ball fails to result in a putout. Rule 10.05 to 10.06 
94 
(b) The official scorer shall not credit a base hit when a: 
(1) runner is forced out by a batted ball, or would have been forced out except for 
a fielding error; 
(2) batter apparently hits safely and a runner who is forced to advance by reason 
of the batter becoming a runner fails to touch the first base to which such 
runner is advancing and is called out on appeal.  The official scorer shall 
charge the batter with a time at bat but no hit; 
(3) pitcher, the catcher or any infielder handles a batted ball and puts out a 
preceding runner who is attempting to advance one base or to return to his 
original base, or would have put out such runner with ordinary effort except 
for a fielding error.  The official scorer shall charge the batter with a time at 
bat but no hit; 
(4) fielder fails in an attempt to put out a preceding runner and, in the scorer’s 
judgment, the batter-runner could have been put out at first base; or 
 Rule 10.05(b) Comment:  Rule 10.05(b) shall not apply if the fielder merely looks toward or feints 
toward another base before attempting to make the putout at first base. 
(5) runner is called out for interference with a fielder attempting to field a batted 
ball, unless in the scorer’s judgment the batter-runner would have been safe 
had the interference not occurred. 
10.06 DETERMINING VALUE OF BASE HITS
 The official scorer shall score a base hit as a one-base hit, two-base hit, three-base 
hit or home run when no error or putout results, as follows: 
(a) Subject to the provisions of Rules 10.06(b) and 10.06(c), it is a one-base hit if the 
batter stops at first base; it is a two-base hit if the batter stops at second base; it a 
three-base hit if the batter stops at third base; and it is a home run if the batter 
touches all bases and scores. 
(b) When, with one or more runners on base, the batter advances more than one base on 
a safe hit and the defensive team makes an attempt to put out a preceding runner, 
the scorer shall determine whether the batter made a legitimate two-base hit or 
three-base hit, or whether the batter-runner advanced beyond first base on the 
fielder’s choice.Rule 10.06 
95 
 Rule 10.06 Comment:  The official scorer shall not credit the batter with a three-base hit when a 
preceding runner is put out at home plate, or would have been out but for an error.  The official scorer 
shall not credit the batter with a two-base hit when a preceding runner trying to advance from first base is 
put out at third base, or would have been out but for an error.  The official scorer shall not, however, with 
the exception of the above, determine the value of base-hits by the number of bases advanced by a 
preceding runner.  A batter may deserve a two-base hit even though a preceding runner advances one or 
no bases; a batter may deserve only a one-base hit even though he reaches second base and a preceding 
runner advances two bases.  For example: 
(1) Runner on first.  Batter hits to right fielder, who throws to third base in an unsuccessful 
attempt to put out runner.  Batter takes second base.  The official scorer shall credit batter 
with one-base hit. 
(2) Runner on second.  Batter hits fair fly ball.  Runner holds up to determine if ball is caught 
and then advances only to third base, while batter takes second base.  The official scorer 
shall credit batter with two-base hit. 
(3) Runner on third.  Batter hits high, fair fly.  Runner takes a lead, then runs back to tag up, 
thinking the ball will be caught.  The ball falls safe, but runner cannot score, although batter 
has reached second.  The official scorer shall credit batter with a two-base hit. 
(c) When the batter attempts to make a two-base hit or a three-base hit by sliding, he 
must hold the last base to which he advances. If a batter-runner overslides and is 
tagged out before getting back to the base safely, he shall be credited with only as 
many bases as he attained safely.  If a batter-runner overslides second base and is 
tagged out, the official scorer shall credited him with a one-base hit; if the batterrunner overslides third base and is tagged out, the official scorer shall credit him 
with a two-base hit. 
 Rule 10.06(c) Comment:  If the batter-runner overruns second or third base and is tagged out 
trying to return, the official scorer shall credit the batter-runner with the last base he touched.  If a batterrunner runs past second base after reaching that base on his feet, attempts to return and is tagged out, the 
official scorer shall credit the batter with a two-base hit.  If a batter-runner runs past third base after 
reaching that base on his feet, attempts to return and is tagged out, the official scorer shall credit the 
batter with a three-base hit. 
(d) When the batter, after making a safe hit, is called out for having failed to touch a 
base, the last base the batter reached safely shall determine if the official scorer shall 
credit him with a one-base hit, a two-base hit or a three-base hit.  If a batter-runner 
is called out after missing home plate, the official scorer shall credit him with a 
three-base hit.  If a batter-runner is called out for missing third base, the official 
scorer shall credit him with a two-base hit.  If a batter-runner is called out for 
missing second base, the official scorer shall credit him with a one-base hit.  If a 
batter-runner is called out for missing first base, the official scorer shall charge him 
with a time at bat, but no hit. Rule 10.06 to 10.07 
96 
(e) When a batter-runner is awarded two bases, three bases or a home run under the 
provisions of Rules 7.05 or 7.06(a), the official scorer shall credit the batter-runner 
with a two-base hit, a three-base hit or a home run, as the case may be. 
(f) Subject to the provisions of Rule 10.06(g), when a batter ends a game with a safe hit 
that drives in as many runs as are necessary to put his team in the lead, the official 
scorer shall credit such batter with only as many bases on his hit as are advanced by 
the runner who scores the winning run, and then only if the batter runs out his hit for 
as many bases as are advanced by the runner who scores the winning run. 
 Rule 10.06(f) Comment:  The official scorer shall apply this rule even when the batter is 
theoretically entitled to more bases because of being awarded an “automatic” extra-base hit under 
various provisions of Rules 6.09 and 7.05. 
 The official scorer shall credit the batter with a base touched in the natural course of play, even if 
the winning run has scored moments before on the same play.  For example, the score is tied in the 
bottom of the ninth inning with a runner on second base and the batter hits a ball to the outfield that falls 
for a base hit.  The runner scores after the batter has touched first base and continued on to second base 
but shortly before the batter-runner reaches second base.  If the batter-runner reaches second base, the 
official scorer shall credit the batter with a two-base hit.   
(g) When the batter ends a game with a home run hit out of the playing field, the batter 
and any runners on base are entitled to score. 
10.07 STOLEN BASES AND CAUGHT STEALING 
 The official scorer shall credit a stolen base to a runner whenever the runner 
advances one base unaided by a hit, a putout,  an error, a force-out, a fielder’s choice, a 
passed ball, a wild pitch or a balk, subject to the following: 
(a) When a runner starts for the next base before the pitcher delivers the ball and the 
pitch results in what ordinarily is scored a wild pitch or passed ball, the official 
scorer shall credit the runner with a stolen base and shall not charge the misplay, 
unless, as a result of the misplay, the stealing runner advances an extra base, or 
another runner also advances, in which case the official scorer shall score the wild 
pitch or passed ball as well as the stolen base. 
(b) When a runner is attempting to steal, and the catcher, after  receiving the pitch, 
makes a wild throw trying to prevent the stolen base, the official scorer shall credit 
the runner with a stolen base.  The official scorer shall not charge an error unless the 
wild throw permits the stealing runner to advance one or more extra bases, or 
permits another runner to advance, in which case the official scorer shall credit the 
runner with the stolen base and charge one error to the catcher. Rule 10.07 
97 
(c) When a runner, attempting to steal, or after being picked off base, evades being put 
out in a run-down play and advances to the next base without the aid of an error, the 
official scorer shall credit the runner with a stolen base.  If another runner also 
advances on the play, the official scorer shall credit both runners with stolen bases. 
If a runner advances while another runner, attempting to steal, evades being put out 
in a run-down play and returns safely, without the aid of an error, to the base he 
originally occupied, the official scorer shall credit a stolen base to the runner who 
advances. 
(d) When a double- or triple-steal is attempted and one runner is thrown out before 
reaching and holding the base such runner is attempting to steal, no other runner 
shall be credited with a stolen base. 
(e) When a runner is tagged out after oversliding a base, while attempting either to 
return to that base or to advance to the next base, the official scorer shall not credit 
such runner with a stolen base. 
(f) When in the scorer’s judgment a runner attempting to steal is safe because of a 
muffed throw, the official scorer shall not credit a stolen base.  The official scorer 
shall credit an assist to the fielder who made the throw, charge an error to the fielder 
who muffed the throw and charge the runner with “caught stealing.” 
(g) The official scorer shall not score a stolen base when a runner advances solely 
because of the defensive team’s indifference to the runner’s advance.  The official 
scorer shall score such a play as a fielder’s choice. 
 Rule 10.07(g) Comment:  The scorer shall consider, in judging whether the defensive team has 
been indifferent to a runner’s advance, the totality of the circumstances, including the inning and score of 
the game, whether the defensive team had held the runner on base, whether the pitcher had made any 
pickoff attempts on that runner before the runner’s advance, whether the fielder ordinarily expected to 
cover the base to which the runner advanced made a move to cover such base, whether the defensive 
team had a legitimate strategic motive to not contest the runner’s advance or whether the defensive team 
might be trying impermissibly to deny the runner credit for a stolen base.  For example, with runners on 
first and third bases, the official scorer should ordinarily credit a stolen base when the runner on first 
advances to second, if, in the scorer’s judgment, the defensive team had a legitimate strategic motive—
namely, preventing the runner on third base from scoring on the throw to second base—not to contest the 
runner’s advance to second base.  The official scorer may conclude that the defensive team is 
impermissibly trying to deny a runner credit for a stolen base if, for example, the defensive team fails to 
defend the advance of a runner approaching a league or career record or a league statistical title. 
(h) The official scorer shall charge a runner as “caught stealing” if such runner is put 
out, or would have been put out by errorless play, when such runner Rule 10.07 to 10.08 
98 
(1) tries to steal; 
(2) is picked off a base and tries to advance (any move toward the next base shall 
be considered an attempt to advance); or 
(3) overslides while stealing. 
 Rule 10.07(h) Comment:  In those instances where a pitched ball eludes the catcher and the runner 
is put out trying to advance, the official scorer shall not charge any “caught stealing.”  The official scorer 
shall not charge any caught stealing when a runner is awarded a base due to obstruction or when a runner 
is called out due to interference by the batter.  The official scorer shall not charge a runner with a caught 
stealing if such runner would not have been credited with a stolen base had such runner been safe (for 
example, when a catcher throws the runner out after such runner tries to advance after a ball that had 
eluded the catcher on a pitch). 
10.08 SACRIFICES 
 The official scorer shall: 
(a) Score a sacrifice bunt when, before two are out, the batter advances one or more 
runners with a bunt and is put out at first base, or would have been put out except 
for a fielding error, unless, in the judgment of the official scorer, the batter was 
bunting exclusively for a base hit and not sacrificing his own chance of reaching 
first base for the purpose of advancing a runner or runners, in which case the official 
scorer shall charge the batter with a time at bat; 
 Rule 10.08(a) Comment:  In determining whether the batter had been sacrificing his own chance of 
reaching first base for the purpose of advancing a runner, the official scorer shall give the batter the 
benefit of the doubt.  The official scorer shall consider the totality of the circumstances of the at-bat, 
including the inning, the number of outs and the score. 
(b) Score a sacrifice bunt when, before two are out, the fielders handle a bunted ball 
without error in an unsuccessful attempt to put out a preceding runner advancing 
one base, unless, an attempt to turn a bunt into a putout of a preceding runner fails, 
and in the judgment of the official scorer ordinary effort would not have put out the 
batter at first base, in which case the batter shall be credited with a one-base hit and 
not a sacrifice;
(c) Not score a sacrifice bunt when any runner is put out attempting to advance one 
base on a bunt, in which case the official scorer shall charge the batter with a time at 
bat; and Rule 10.08 to 10.09 
99 
(d) Score a sacrifice fly when, before two are out, the batter hits a ball in flight handled 
by an outfielder or an infielder running in the outfield in fair or foul territory that 
(1) is caught, and a runner scores after the catch, or 
(2) is dropped, and a runner scores, if in the scorer’s judgment the runner could 
have scored after the catch had the fly been caught. 
 Rule 10.08(d) Comment:  The official scorer shall score a sacrifice fly in accordance with Rule 
10.08(d)(2) even though another runner is forced out by reason of the batter becoming a runner. 
10.09 PUTOUTS
 A putout is a statistic credited to a fielder whose action causes the out of a batterrunner or runner, as set forth in this Rule 10.09. 
(a) The official scorer shall credit a putout to each fielder who 
(1) catches a ball that is in flight, whether fair or foul; 
(2) catches a batted or thrown ball and tags a base to put out a batter or runner; or 
 Rule 10.09(a)(2) Comment:  The official scorer shall credit a fielder with a putout if such fielder 
catches a thrown ball and tags a base to record an out on an appeal play. 
(3) tags a runner when the runner is off the base to which the runner is entitled. 
(b) The official scorer shall credit an automatic putout to the catcher when a: 
(1) batter is called out on strikes; 
(2) batter is called out for an illegally batted ball; 
(3) batter is called out for bunting foul for his third strike; 
Rule 10.09(b)(3) Comment:  Note the exception in Rule 10.15(a)(4). 
(4) batter is called out for being touched by his own batted ball; 
(5) batter is called out for interfering with the catcher; 
(6) batter is called out for failing to bat in his proper turn; 
 Rule 10.09(b)(6) Comment:  See Rule 10.03(d). Rule 10.09 
100 
(7) batter is called out for refusing to touch first base after receiving a base on 
balls, after being hit by a pitch or after a catcher’s interference ; or 
(8) runner is called out for refusing to advance from third base to home plate. 
(c) The official scorer shall credit automatic putouts as follows (and shall credit no 
assists on these plays except as specified): 
(1) When the batter is called out on an Infield Fly that is not caught, the official 
scorer shall credit the putout to the fielder who the scorer believes could have 
made the catch; 
(2) When a runner is called out for being touched by a fair ball (including an 
Infield Fly), the official scorer shall credit the putout to the fielder nearest the 
ball; 
(3) When a runner is called out for running out of line to avoid being tagged, the 
official scorer shall credit the putout to the fielder whom the runner avoided; 
(4) When a runner is called out for passing another runner, the official scorer shall 
credit the putout to the fielder nearest the point of passing; 
(5) When a runner is called out for running the bases in reverse order, the official 
scorer shall credit the putout to the fielder covering the base the runner left in 
starting his reverse run; 
(6) When a runner is called out for having interfered with a fielder, the official 
scorer shall credit the putout to the fielder with whom the runner interfered, 
unless the fielder was in the act of throwing the ball when the interference 
occurred, in which case the official scorer shall credit the putout to the fielder 
for whom the throw was intended and shall credit an assist to the fielder whose 
throw was interfered with; or 
(7) When the batter-runner is called out because of interference by a preceding 
runner, as provided in Rule 6.05(m), the official scorer shall credit the putout 
to the first baseman.  If the fielder interfered with was in the act of throwing 
the ball, the official scorer shall credit such fielder with an assist but shall 
credit only one assist on any one play under the provisions of Rule 10.09(c)(6) 
and 10.09(c)(7). Rule 10.10 
101 
10.10 ASSISTS 
 An assist is a statistic credited to a fielder whose action contributes to a batterrunner or runner being put out, as set forth in this Rule 10.10. 
(a) The official scorer shall credit an assist to each fielder who 
(1) throws or deflects a batted or thrown ball in such a way that a putout results, or 
would have resulted except for a subsequent error by any fielder. Only one 
assist and no more shall be credited to each fielder who throws or deflects the 
ball in a run-down play that results in a putout, or would have resulted in a 
putout, except for a subsequent error; or 
 Rule 10.10(a)(1) Comment:  Mere ineffective contact with the ball shall not be considered an 
assist.  “Deflect” shall mean to slow down or change the direction of the ball and thereby effectively 
assist in putting out a batter or runner.  If a putout results from an appeal play within the natural course of 
play, the official scorer shall give assists to each fielder, except the fielder making the putout, whose 
action led to the putout.  If a putout results from an appeal play initiated by the pitcher throwing to a 
fielder after the previous play has ended, the official scorer shall credit the pitcher, and only the pitcher, 
with an assist. 
(2)  throws or deflects the ball during a play that results in a runner being called 
out for interference or for running out of line. 
(b) The official scorer shall not credit an assist to 
(1) the pitcher on a strikeout, unless the pitcher fields an uncaught third strike and 
makes a throw that results in a putout; 
(2) the pitcher when, as the result of a legal pitch received by the catcher, a runner 
is put out, as when the catcher picks a runner off base, throws out a runner 
trying to steal or tags a runner trying to score; or 
(3) a fielder whose wild throw permits a runner to advance, even though the 
runner subsequently is put out as a result of continuous play.  A play that 
follows a misplay (whether or not the misplay is an error) is a new play, and 
the fielder making any misplay shall not be credited with an assist unless such 
fielder takes part in the new play.Rule 10.11 to 10.12 
102 
10.11 DOUBLE AND TRIPLE PLAYS
 The official scorer shall credit participation in a double play or triple play to each 
fielder who earns a putout or an assist when two or three players are put out between the 
time a pitch is delivered and the time the ball next becomes dead or is next in possession of 
the pitcher in a pitching position, unless an error or misplay intervenes between putouts. 
 Rule 10.11 Comment:  The official scorer shall credit a double play or triple play also if an appeal 
play after the ball is in possession of the pitcher results in an additional putout. 
10.12 ERRORS 
 An error is a statistic charged against a fielder whose action has assisted the team 
on offense, as set forth in this Rule 10.12. 
(a) The official scorer shall charge an error against any fielder: 
(1)  whose misplay (fumble, muff or wild throw) prolongs the time at bat of a 
batter, prolongs the presence on the bases of a runner or permits a runner to 
advance one or more bases, unless, in the judgment of the official scorer, such 
fielder deliberately permits a foul fly to fall safe with a runner on third base 
before two are out in order that the runner on third shall not score after the 
catch; 
 Rule 10.12(a)(1) Comment:  Slow handling of the ball that does not involve mechanical misplay 
shall not be construed as an error.  For example, the official scorer shall not charge a fielder with an error 
if such fielder fields a ground ball cleanly but does not throw to first base in time to retire the batter.  It is 
not necessary that the fielder touch the ball to be charged with an error.  If a ground ball goes through a 
fielder’s legs or a fly ball falls untouched and, in the scorer’s judgment, the fielder could have handled 
the ball with ordinary effort, the official scorer shall charge such fielder with an error.  For example, the 
official scorer shall charge an infielder with an error when a ground ball passes to either side of such 
infielder if, in the official scorer’s judgment, a fielder at that position making ordinary effort would have 
fielded such ground ball and retired a runner.  The official scorer shall charge an outfielder with an error 
if such outfielder allows a fly ball to drop to the ground if, in the official scorer’s judgment, an outfielder 
at that position making ordinary effort would have caught such fly ball.  If a throw is low, wide or high, 
or strikes the ground, and a runner reaches base who otherwise would have been put out by such throw, 
the official scorer shall charge the player making the throw with an error. 
 The official scorer shall not score mental mistakes or misjudgments as errors unless a specific rule 
prescribes otherwise.  A fielder’s mental mistake that leads to a physical misplay—such as throwing the 
ball into the stands or rolling the ball to the pitcher’s mound, mistakenly believing there to be three outs, 
and thereby allowing a runner or runners to advance—shall not be considered a mental mistake for 
purposes of this rule and the official scorer shall charge a fielder committing such a mistake with an 
error.  The official scorer shall not charge an error if the pitcher fails to cover first base on a play, thereby 
allowing a batter-runner to reach first base safely.  The official scorer shall not charge an error to a 
fielder who incorrectly throws to the wrong base on a play. Rule 10.12 
103 
 The official scorer shall charge an error to a fielder who causes another fielder to misplay a ball—
for example, by knocking the ball out of the other fielder’s glove.  On such a play, when the official 
scorer charges an error to the interfering fielder, the official scorer shall not charge an error to the fielder 
with whom the other fielder interfered. 
(2) when such fielder muffs a foul fly to prolong the time at bat of a batter, 
whether the batter subsequently reaches first base or is put out; 
(3)  when such fielder catches a thrown ball or a ground ball in time to put out the 
batter-runner and fails to tag first base or the batter-runner; 
(4)  when such fielder catches a thrown ball or a ground ball in time to put out any 
runner on a force play and fails to tag the base or the runner; 
(5)  whose wild throw permits a runner to reach a base safely, when in the scorer’s 
judgment a good throw would have put out the runner, unless such wild throw 
is made attempting to prevent a stolen base; 
(6)  whose wild throw in attempting to prevent a runner’s advance permits that 
runner or any other runner to advance one or more bases beyond the base such 
runner would have reached had the throw not been wild; 
(7)  whose throw takes an unnatural bounce, touches a base or the pitcher’s plate, 
or touches a runner, a fielder or an umpire, thereby permitting any runner to 
advance; or 
 Rule 10.12(a)(7) Comment:  The official scorer shall apply this rule even when it appears to be an 
injustice to a fielder whose throw was accurate.  For example, the official scorer shall charge an error to 
an outfielder whose accurate throw to second base hits the base and caroms back into the outfield, 
thereby permitting a runner or runners to advance, because every base advanced by a runner must be 
accounted for. 
(8) whose failure to stop, or try to stop, an accurately thrown ball permits a runner 
to advance, so long as there was occasion for the throw.  If such throw was 
made to second base, the official scorer shall determine whether it was the 
duty of the second baseman or the shortstop to stop the ball and shall charge 
an error to the negligent fielder. 
 Rule 10.12(a)(8) Comment:  If, in the official scorer’s judgment, there was no occasion for the 
throw, the official scorer shall charge an error to the fielder who threw the ball. 
(b) The official scorer shall charge only one error on any wild throw, regardless of the 
number of bases advanced by one or more runners. Rule 10.12 
104 
(c) When an umpire awards the batter or any runner or runners one or more bases 
because of interference or obstruction, the official scorer shall charge the fielder 
who committed the interference or obstruction with one error, no matter how many 
bases the batter, or runner or runners, may advance. 
 Rule 10.12(c) Comment:  The official scorer shall not charge an error if obstruction does not 
change the play, in the opinion of the scorer. 
(d) The official scorer shall not charge an error against: 
(1) the catcher when the catcher, after receiving the pitch, makes a wild throw 
attempting to prevent a stolen base, unless the wild throw permits the stealing 
runner to advance one or more extra bases or permits any other runner to 
advance one or more bases; 
(2) any fielder who makes a wild throw if in the scorer’s judgment the runner 
would not have been put out with ordinary effort by a good throw, unless such 
wild throw permits any runner to advance beyond the base he would have 
reached had the throw not been wild; 
(3) any fielder who makes a wild throw in attempting to complete a double play or 
triple play, unless such wild throw enables any runner to advance beyond the 
base such runner would have reached had the throw not been wild; 
 Rule 10.12(d) Comment:  When a fielder muffs a thrown ball that, if held, would have completed a 
double play or triple play, the official scorer shall charge an error to the fielder who drops the ball and 
credit an assist to the fielder who made the throw. 
(4) any fielder when, after fumbling a ground ball or dropping a batted ball that is 
in flight or a thrown ball, the fielder recovers the ball in time to force out a 
runner at any base; or 
(5) any fielder when a wild pitch or passed ball is scored. 
(e) The official scorer shall not charge an error when the batter is awarded first base on 
four called balls, when the batter is awarded first base when touched by a pitched 
ball, or when the batter reaches first base as the result of a wild pitch or passed ball. 
 Rule 10.12(e) Comment:  See Rule 10.13 for additional scoring rules relating to wild pitches and 
passed balls. 
(f) The official scorer shall not charge an error when a runner or runners advance as the 
result of a passed ball, a wild pitch or a balk. Rule 10.12 to 10.13 
105 
(1) When the fourth called ball is a wild pitch or a passed ball and as a result 
(i) the batter-runner advances to a base beyond first base; 
(ii) any runner forced to advance by the base on balls advances more than 
one base; or 
(iii) any runner, not forced to advance, advances one or more bases, the 
official scorer shall score the base  on balls and also the wild pitch or 
passed ball, as the case may be. 
(2) When the catcher recovers the ball after a wild pitch or passed ball on the third 
strike, and throws out the batter-runner at first base, or tags out the 
batter-runner, but another runner or runners advance, the official scorer shall 
score the strikeout, the putout and assists, if any, and credit the advance of the 
other runner or runners on the play as a fielder’s choice. 
 Rule 10.12(f) Comment:  See Rule 10.13 for additional scoring rules relating to wild pitches and 
passed balls. 
10.13 WILD PITCHES AND PASSED BALLS 
 A wild pitch is defined in Rule 2.00 (Wild Pitch).  A passed ball is a statistic 
charged against a catcher whose action has caused a runner or runners to advance, as set 
forth in this Rule 10.13. 
(a) The official scorer shall charge a pitcher with a wild pitch when a legally delivered 
ball is so high, so wide or so low that the catcher does not stop and control the ball 
by ordinary effort, thereby permitting a runner or runners to advance.  The official 
scorer shall charge a pitcher with a wild pitch when a legally delivered ball touches 
the ground or home plate before reaching the catcher and is not handled by the 
catcher, thereby permitting a runner or runners to advance.  When the third strike is 
a wild pitch, permitting the batter to reach first base, the official scorer shall score a 
strikeout and a wild pitch.  
(b) The official scorer shall charge a catcher with a passed ball when the catcher fails to 
hold or to control a legally pitched ball that should have been held or controlled 
with ordinary effort, thereby permitting a runner or runners to advance.  When the 
third strike is a passed ball, permitting the batter to reach first base, the official 
scorer shall score a strikeout and a passed ball. Rule 10.13 to 10.15 
106 
 Rule 10.13 Comment:  The official scorer shall not charge a wild pitch or passed ball if the 
defensive team makes an out before any runners advance.  For example, if a pitch touches the ground 
and eludes the catcher with a runner on first base, but the catcher recovers the ball and throws to second 
base in time to retire the runner, the official scorer shall not charge the pitcher with a wild pitch.  The 
official scorer shall credit the advancement of any other runner on the play as a fielder’s choice.  If a 
catcher drops a pitch, for example, with a runner on first base, but the catcher recovers the ball and 
throws to second base in time to retire the runner, the official scorer shall not charge the catcher with a 
passed ball.  The official scorer shall credit the advancement of any other runner on the play as a fielder’s 
choice. 
 See Rules 10.07(a), 10.12(e) and 10.12(f) for additional scoring rules relating to wild pitches and 
passed balls. 
10.14 BASES ON BALLS 
 A base on balls is defined in Rule 2.00 (Base on Balls).
(a) The official scorer shall score a base on balls whenever a batter is awarded first base 
because of four balls having been pitched outside the strike zone, but when the 
fourth such ball touches the batter it shall be scored as a “hit batter.” 
 Rule 10.14(a) Comment:  See Rule 10.16(h) for the procedure when more than one pitcher is 
involved in giving a base on balls.  See also Rule 10.15(b), which addresses situations in which a 
substitute batter receives a base on balls. 
(b) The official scorer shall score an intentional base on balls when the pitcher makes 
no attempt to throw the last pitch to the batter into the strike zone, but purposely 
throws the ball wide to the catcher outside the catcher’s box. 
(c) If a batter awarded a base on balls is called out for refusing to advance to first base, 
the official scorer shall not credit the base on balls and shall charge a time at bat. 
10.15 STRIKEOUTS 
 A strikeout is a statistic credited to a pitcher and charged to a batter when the 
umpire calls three strikes on a batter, as set forth in this Rule 10.15. 
(a) The official scorer shall score a strikeout whenever a batter: 
(1) is put out by a third strike caught by the catcher; 
(2) is put out by a third strike not caught when there is a runner on first before two 
are out; Rule 10.15 to 10.16 
107 
(3) becomes a runner because a third strike is not caught; or 
(4) bunts foul on third strike, unless such bunt on third strike results in a foul fly 
caught by any fielder, in which case the official scorer shall not score a 
strikeout and shall credit the fielder who catches such foul fly with a putout. 
(b) When a batter leaves the game with two strikes against him, and the substitute batter 
completes a strikeout, the official scorer shall charge the strikeout and the time at 
bat to the first batter.  If the substitute batter completes the turn at bat in any other 
manner, including a base on balls, the official scorer shall score the action as having 
been that of the substitute batter. 
10.16 EARNED RUNS AND RUNS ALLOWED 
 An earned run is a run for which a pitcher is held accountable.  In determining 
earned runs, the official scorer shall reconstruct the inning without the errors (which exclude 
catcher’s interference) and passed balls, giving the benefit of the doubt always to the pitcher 
in determining which bases would have been reached by runners had there been errorless 
play.  For the purpose of determining earned runs, an intentional base on balls, regardless of 
the circumstances, shall be construed in exactly the same manner as any other base on balls. 
(a) The official scorer shall charge an earned run against a pitcher every time a runner 
reaches home base by the aid of safe hits, sacrifice bunts, a sacrifice fly, stolen 
bases, putouts, fielder’s choices, bases on balls, hit batters, balks or wild pitches 
(including a wild pitch on third strike that permits a batter to reach first base) before 
fielding chances have been offered to put out the offensive team.  For the purpose of 
this rule, a defensive interference penalty shall be construed as a fielding chance. A 
wild pitch is solely the pitcher’s fault and shall contribute to an earned run just as a 
base on balls or a balk. 
 Rule 10.16(a) Comment:  The following are examples of earned runs charged to a pitcher: 
(1) Peter pitches and retires Abel and Baker, the first two batters of an inning.  Charlie reaches 
first base on an error charged to a fielder.  Daniel hits a home run.  Edward hits a home run. 
Peter retires Frank to end the inning.  Three runs have scored, but no earned runs are charged 
to Peter, because Charlie should have been the third out of the inning, as reconstructed 
without the error. 
(2) Peter pitches and retires Abel.  Baker hits a triple.  While pitching to Charlie, Peter throws a 
wild pitch, allowing Baker to score.  Peter retires Daniel and Edward.  One run has scored, 
charged as an earned run to Peter, because the wild pitch contributes to an earned run. 
 In an inning in which a batter-runner reaches first base on a catcher’s interference, such batterrunner shall not count as an earned run should he subsequently score.  The official scorer shall not 
assume, however, that such batter would have made an out absent the catcher’s interference (unlike, for Rule 10.16 
108 
example, situations in which a batter-runner reaches first  base safely because of a fielder’s misplay of a 
ball for an error).  Because such batter never had a chance to complete his time at bat, it is unknown how 
such batter would have fared absent the catcher’s interference.  Compare the following examples: 
(3) With two out, Abel reaches first on an error by the shortstop in misplaying a ground ball.  
Baker hits a home run.  Charlie strikes out.  Two runs have scored, but none is earned, 
because Abel’s at-bat should have been the third out of the inning, as reconstructed without 
the error. 
(4) With two out, Abel reaches first on a catcher’s interference.  Baker hits a home run.  Charlie 
strikes out.  Two runs have scored, but one (Baker’s) is earned, because the official scorer 
cannot assume that Abel would have made an out to end the inning, absent the catcher’s 
interference. 
(b) No run shall be earned when scored by a runner who reaches first base 
(1) on a hit or otherwise after his time at bat is prolonged by a muffed foul fly; 
(2) because of interference or obstruction; or
(3) because of any fielding error. 
(c) No run shall be earned when scored by a runner whose presence on the bases is 
prolonged by an error, if such runner would have been put out by errorless play. 
(d) No run shall be earned when the scoring runner’s advance has been aided by an 
error, a passed ball or defensive interference or obstruction, if in the official scorer’s 
judgment the run would not have scored without the aid of such misplay. 
(e) An error by a pitcher is treated exactly the same as an error by any other fielder in 
computing earned runs. 
(f) Whenever a fielding error occurs, the pitcher shall be given the benefit of the doubt 
in determining to which bases any runners would have advanced had the fielding of 
the defensive team been errorless. 
(g) When pitchers are changed during an inning, the official scorer shall not charge the 
relief pitcher with any run (earned or unearned) scored by a runner who was on base 
at the time such relief pitcher entered the game, nor for runs scored by any runner 
who reaches base on a fielder’s choice that puts out a runner left on base by any 
preceding pitcher. 
 Rule 10.16(g) Comment:  It is the intent of Rule 10.16(g) to charge each pitcher with the number 
of runners he put on base, rather than with the individual runners.  When a pitcher puts runners on base 
and is relieved, such pitcher shall be charged with all runs subsequently scored up to and including the 
number of runners such pitcher left on base when such pitcher left the game, unless such runners are put Rule 10.16 
109 
out without action by the batter (i.e., caught stealing, picked off base or called out for interference when a 
batter-runner does not reach first base on the play).   For example: 
(1) Peter is pitching.  Abel reaches first base on a base on balls.  Roger relieves Peter.  Baker 
grounds out, advancing Abel to second base.  Charlie flies out.  Daniel singles, scoring Abel.  
Abel’s run is charged to Peter  
(2) Peter is pitching.  Abel reaches first base on a base on balls.  Roger relieves Peter.  Baker 
forces Abel at second bases.  Charlie grounds out, advancing Baker to second base.  Daniel 
singles, scoring Baker.  Baker’s run is charged to Peter.   
(3) Peter is pitching.  Abel reaches first base on a base on balls.  Roger relieves Peter.  Baker 
singles, advancing Abel to third base.  Charlie grounds to short, with Abel out at home plate 
and Baker advancing to second base. Daniel flies out.  Edward singles, scoring Baker.  
Baker’s run is charged to Peter. 
(4) Peter is pitching.  Abel reaches first base on a base on balls.  Roger relieves Peter.  Baker 
reaches on a base on balls.  Charlie flies out.  Abel is picked off second base.  Daniel 
doubles, scoring Baker from first base.  Baker’s run is charged to Roger. 
(5) Peter is pitching.  Abel reaches first base on a base on balls.  Roger relieves Peter.  Baker 
reaches first base on a base on balls.  Sierra relieves Roger.  Charlie forces Abel at third 
base.  Daniel forces Baker at third base.  Edward hits a home run, scoring three runs.  The 
official scorer shall charge one run to Peter, one run to Roger and one run to Sierra.   
(6) Peter is pitching.  Abel reaches first base on a base on balls.  Roger relieves Peter.  Baker 
reaches first base on a base on balls. Charlie singles, filling the bases.  Daniel forces Abel at 
home plate.  Edward singles, scoring Baker and Charlie.  The official scorer shall charge one 
run to Peter and one run to Roger. 
(7) Peter is pitching.  Abel reaches first base on a base on balls.  Roger relieves Peter.  Baker 
singles, but Abel is out trying to reach third base and Baker advances to second base on the 
throw.  Charlie singles, scoring Baker. Baker’s run is charged to Roger. 
(h) A relief pitcher shall not be held accountable when the first batter to whom he 
pitches reaches first base on four called balls if such batter has a decided advantage 
in the ball and strike count when pitchers are changed. 
(1) If, when pitchers are changed, the count is  
2 balls, no strike,  
2 balls, 1 strike,  
3 balls, no strike,  
3 balls, 1 strike,  
3 balls, 2 strikes, 
and the batter gets a base on balls, the official scorer shall charge that batter 
and the base on balls to the preceding pitcher, not to the relief pitcher. 
(2) Any other action by such batter, such  as reaching base on a hit, an error, a 
fielder’s choice, a force-out, or being touched by a pitched ball, shall cause 
such a batter to be charged to the relief pitcher. Rule 10.16 to 10.17 
110 
 Rule 10.16(h) Comment:  The provisions of Rule 10.16(h)(2) shall not be construed as affecting or 
conflicting with the provisions of Rule 10.16(g). 
(3) If, when pitchers are changed, the count is 
2 balls, 2 strikes, 
1 ball, 2 strikes, 
1 ball, 1 strike, 
1 ball, no strike, 
no ball, 2 strikes, 
no ball, 1 strike,  
the official scorer shall charge that batter and  the actions of that batter to the 
relief pitcher. 
(i) When pitchers are changed during an inning, the relief pitcher shall not have the 
benefit of previous chances for outs not accepted in determining earned runs. 
 Rule 10.16(i) Comment:  It is the intent of Rule 10.16(i) to charge a relief pitcher with earned runs 
for which such relief pitcher is solely responsible.  In some instances, runs charged as earned against the 
relief pitcher can be charged as unearned against the team.  For example: 
(1) With two out and Peter pitching, Abel reaches first base on a base on balls.  Baker reaches 
first base on an error.  Roger relieves Peter.  Charlie hits a home run, scoring three runs.  The 
official scorer shall charge two unearned runs to Peter, one earned run to Roger and three 
unearned runs to the team (because the inning should have ended with the third out when 
Baker batted and an error was committed). 
(2) With two out, and Peter pitching, Abel and Baker each reach first base on a base on balls.  
Roger relieves Peter.  Charlie reaches first base on an error.  Daniel hits a home run, scoring 
four runs.  The official scorer shall charge two unearned runs to Peter and two unearned runs 
to Roger (because the inning should have ended with the third out when Charlie batted and 
an error was committed). 
(3) With none out and Peter pitching, Abel reaches first base on a base on balls.  Baker reaches 
first base on an error.  Roger relieves Peter.  Charlie hits a home run, scoring three runs.  
Daniel and Edward strike out.  Frank reaches first base on an error.  George hits a home run, 
scoring two runs.  The official scorer shall charge two runs, one of them earned, to Peter, 
three runs, one of them earned, to Roger and five runs, two of them earned, to the team 
(because only Abel and Charlie would have scored in an inning reconstructed without the 
errors). 
10.17 WINNING AND LOSING PITCHER 
(a) The official scorer shall credit as  the winning pitcher that pitcher whose team 
assumes a lead while such pitcher is in the game, or during the inning on offense in 
which such pitcher is removed from the game, and does not relinquish such lead, 
unless Rule 10.17 
111 
(1) such pitcher is a starting pitcher and Rule 10.17(b) applies; or 
(2) Rule 10.17(c) applies. 
 Rule 10.17(a) Comment:  Whenever the score is tied, the game becomes a new contest insofar as 
the winning pitcher is concerned.  Once the opposing team assumes the lead, all pitchers who have 
pitched up to that point and have been replaced are excluded from being credited with the victory.  If the 
pitcher against whose pitching the opposing team gained the lead continues to pitch until his team 
regains the lead, which it holds to the finish of the game, that pitcher shall be the winning pitcher. 
(b) If the pitcher whose team assumes a lead while such pitcher is in the game, or 
during the inning on offense in which such pitcher is removed from the game, and 
does not relinquish such lead, is a starting pitcher who has not completed 
(1) five innings of a game that lasts six or more innings on defense, or 
(2) four innings of a game that lasts five innings on defense, 
then the official scorer shall credit as the winning pitcher the relief pitcher, if there 
is only one relief pitcher, or the relief pitcher who, in the official scorer’s judgment 
was the most effective, if there is more than one relief pitcher. 
 Rule 10.17(b) Comment:  It is the intent of Rule 10.17(b) that a relief pitcher pitch at least one 
complete inning or pitch when a crucial out is made, within the context of the game (including the score), 
in order to be credited as the winning pitcher.  If the first relief pitcher pitches effectively, the official 
scorer should not presumptively credit that pitcher with the win, because the rule requires that the win be 
credited to the pitcher who was the most effective, and a subsequent relief pitcher may have been most 
effective.  The official scorer, in determining which relief pitcher was the most effective, should consider 
the number of runs, earned runs and base runners given up by each relief pitcher and the context of the 
game at the time of each relief pitcher’s appearance.  If two or more relief pitchers were similarly 
effective, the official scorer should give the presumption to the earlier pitcher as the winning pitcher.  
(c) The official scorer shall not credit as the winning pitcher a relief pitcher who is 
ineffective in a brief appearance, when at least one succeeding relief pitcher pitches 
effectively in helping his team maintain its lead.  In such a case, the official scorer 
shall credit as the winning pitcher the succeeding relief pitcher who was most 
effective, in the judgment of the official scorer. 
 Rule 10.17(c) Comment:  The official scorer generally should, but is not required to, consider the 
appearance of a relief pitcher to be ineffective and brief if such relief pitcher pitches less than one inning 
and allows two or more earned runs to score (even if such runs are charged to a previous pitcher).  Rule 
10.17(b) Comment provides guidance on choosing the winning pitcher from among several succeeding 
relief pitchers.   Rule 10.17 to 10.19 
112 
(d) A losing pitcher is a pitcher who is responsible for the run that gives the winning 
team a lead that the winning team does not relinquish.  
 Rule 10.17(d) Comment:  Whenever the score is tied, the game becomes a new contest insofar as 
the losing pitcher is concerned. 
(e) A league may designate a non-championship game (for example, the Major League 
All-Star Game) for which Rules 10.17(a)(1) and 10.17(b) do not apply.  In such 
games, the official scorer shall credit as the winning pitcher that pitcher whose team 
assumes a lead while such pitcher is in the game, or during the inning on offense in 
which such pitcher is removed from the game, and does not relinquish such lead, 
unless such pitcher is knocked out after the winning team has attained a 
commanding lead and the official scorer concludes that a subsequent pitcher is 
entitled to credit as the winning pitcher. 
10.18 SHUTOUTS 
 A shutout is a statistic credited to a pitcher who allows no runs in a game.  No 
pitcher shall be credited with pitching a shutout unless he pitches the complete game, or 
unless he enters the game with none out before the opposing team has scored in the first 
inning, puts out the side without a run scoring and pitches the rest of the game without 
allowing a run.  When two or more pitchers combine to pitch a shutout, the league 
statistician shall make a notation to that effect in the league’s official pitching records. 
10.19 SAVES FOR RELIEF PITCHERS 
 A save is a statistic credited to a relief pitcher, as set forth in this Rule 10.19. 
 The official scorer shall credit a pitcher with a save when such pitcher meets all four 
of the following conditions: 
(a) He is the finishing pitcher in a game won by his team;  
(b) He is not the winning pitcher;  
(c) He is credited with at least ? of an inning pitched; and 
(d) He satisfies one of the following conditions: 
(1) He enters the game with a lead of no more than three runs and pitches for at 
least one inning;  Rule 10.19 to 10.20 
113 
(2) He enters the game, regardless of the count, with the potential tying run either 
on base, or at bat or on deck (that is, the potential tying run is either already on 
base or is one of the first two batters he faces); or 
 (3) He pitches for at least three innings. 
10.20 STATISTICS 
 The League President shall appoint an official statistician.  The statistician shall 
maintain an accumulative record of all the batting, fielding, running and pitching records 
specified in Rule 10.02 for every player who  appears in a league championship game or 
post-season game. 
 The statistician shall prepare a tabulated report at the end of the season, including all 
individual and team records for every championship game, and shall submit this report to 
the League President.  This report shall identify each player by his first name and surname 
and shall indicate as to each batter whether he bats righthanded, lefthanded or both ways, 
and as to each fielder and pitcher, whether he throws righthanded or lefthanded. 
 When a player listed in the starting lineup is substituted for before he plays on 
defense, he shall not receive credit in the defensive statistics (fielding) unless he actually 
plays that position during the game.  All such players, however, shall be credited with one 
game played (in batting statistics) so long as they are announced into the game or listed on 
the official lineup card. 
 Rule 10.20 Comment:   The official scorer shall credit a player with having played on defense if 
such player is on the field for at least one pitch or play.  If a game is called (for example, because of rain) 
after a substitute player enters the field but before a pitch is thrown or a play is made, the official scorer 
shall credit such player with a game played in the batting statistics but shall not credit such player in any 
defensive statistics.  If a game is called (for example, because of rain) after a relief pitcher enters the field 
but before a pitch is thrown or a play is made, the official scorer shall credit such pitcher with a game 
played in the batting statistics but shall not credit such pitcher in any defensive statistics or with a game 
pitched. 
 Any games played to break a divisional tie shall be included in the statistics for that 
championship season. Rule 10.21 to 10.22 
114 
10.21 DETERMINING PERCENTAGE RECORDS 
 To compute: 
(a) Percentage of games won and lost, divide the number of games won by the sum of 
games won and games lost; 
(b) Batting average, divide the total number of safe hits (not the total bases on hits) by 
the total times at bat, as defined in Rule 10.02(a); 
(c) Slugging percentage, divide the total bases of all safe hits by the total times at bat, 
as defined in Rule 10.02(a); 
(d) Fielding average, divide the sum of putouts and assists by the sum of putouts, assists 
and errors (which shall be called chances); 
(e) Pitcher’s earned-run average, multiply the total earned runs charged against such 
pitcher by 9, and divide the result by the  total number of innings he pitched, 
including fractions of an inning; and 
 Rule 10.21(e) Comment:   For example, 9? innings pitched and 3 earned runs is an earned-run 
average of 2.89 (3 earned runs times 9 divided by 9? equals 2.89). 
(f) On-base percentage, divide the sum of hits, bases on balls and times hit by pitch by 
the sum of at-bats, bases on balls, times hit by pitch and sacrifice flies. 
 Rule 10.21(f) Comment:  For the purpose of computing on-base percentage, ignore instances of a 
batter being awarded first base on interference or obstruction. 
10.22 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR INDIVIDUAL CHAMPIONSHIPS 
 To assure uniformity in establishing the batting, pitching and fielding 
championships of professional leagues, such champions shall meet the following minimum 
performance standards: 
(a) The individual batting, slugging or on-base percentage champion shall be the player 
with the highest batting average, slugging percentage or on-base percentage, as the 
case may be, provided the player is credited with as many or more total appearances 
at the plate in league championship games as the number of games scheduled for 
each club in his club’s league that season, multiplied by 3.1 in the case of a Major 
League player and by 2.7 in the case of a National Association player.  Total 
appearances at the plate shall include official times at bat, plus bases on balls, times Rule 10.22 
115 
hit by pitcher, sacrifice hits, sacrifice flies and times awarded first base because of 
interference or obstruction.  Notwithstanding the foregoing requirement of 
minimum appearances at the plate, any player with fewer than the required number 
of plate appearances whose average would be the highest, if he were charged with 
the required number of plate appearances shall be awarded the batting, slugging or 
on-base percentage championship, as the case may be.
 Rule 10.22(a) Comment:  For example, if a Major League schedules 162 games for each club, 502 
plate appearances qualify (162 times 3.1 equals 502) a player for a batting, slugging or on-base 
percentage championship.  If a National Association league schedules 140 games for each club, 378 
plate appearances qualify (140 times 2.7 equals 378) a player for a batting, slugging or on-base 
percentage championship.  Fractions of a plate appearance are to be rounded up or down to the closest 
whole number.  For example, 162 times 3.1 equals 502.2, which is rounded down to a requirement of 
502. 
 If, for example, Abel has the highest batting average among those with 502 plate appearance in a 
Major League with a .362 batting average (181 hits in 500 at-bats), and Baker has 490 plate appearances, 
440 at-bats and 165 hits for a .375 batting average, Baker shall be the batting champion, because adding 
12 more at-bats to Baker’s record would still give Baker a higher batting average than Abel: .365 (165 
hits in 452 at-bats) to Abel’s .362.
(b) The individual pitching champion in a Major League shall be the pitcher with the 
lowest earned-run average, provided that the pitcher has pitched at least as many 
innings in league championship games as the number of games scheduled for each 
club in his club’s league that season.  The individual pitching champion in a 
National Association league shall be the pitcher with the lowest earned-run average 
provided that the pitcher has pitched at least as many innings in league 
championship season games as 80% of the number of games scheduled for each 
club in the pitcher’s league. 
 Rule 10.22(b) Comment:  For example, if a Major League schedules 162 games for each club, 162 
innings qualify a pitcher for a pitching championship.  A pitcher with 161? innings would not qualify.  
If a National Association league schedules 140 games for each club, 112 innings qualify a pitcher for a 
pitching championship.  Fractions of an inning for the required number of innings are to be rounded to 
the closest third of an inning.  For example, 80% of 144 games is 115.2, so 115? innings would be the 
minimum required for a pitching championship in a National Association league with 144 games 
scheduled and 80% of 76 games is 60.8, so 60? innings would be the minimum required for a pitching 
championship in a National Association league with 76 games scheduled. 
(c) The individual fielding champions shall be the fielders with the highest fielding 
average at each position, provided: 
(1) A catcher must have participated as a catcher in at least one-half the number of 
games scheduled for each club in his league that season; Rule 10.22 to 10.23 
116 
(2) An infielder or outfielder must have participated at his position in at least 
two-thirds of the number of games scheduled for each club in his league that 
season; and 
(3) A pitcher must have pitched at least as many innings as the number of games 
scheduled for each club in his league that season, unless another pitcher has a 
fielding average as high or higher and has handled more total chances in fewer 
innings, in which case such other pitcher shall be the fielding champion. 
10.23 GUIDELINES FOR CUMULATIVE PERFORMANCE RECORDS 
(a) CONSECUTIVE HITTING STREAKS.  A consecutive hitting streak shall not be 
terminated if a batter’s plate appearance results in a base on balls, hit batsman, 
defensive interference or obstruction or  a sacrifice bunt.  A sacrifice fly shall 
terminate the streak. 
(b) CONSECUTIVE-GAME HITTING STREAKS.  A consecutive-game hitting 
streak shall not be terminated if all of a batter’s plate appearances (one or more) in a 
game result in a base on balls, hit batsman, defensive interference or obstruction or 
a sacrifice bunt.  The streak shall terminate if the player has a sacrifice fly and no 
hit. 
A player’s individual consecutive-game hitting streak shall be determined by the 
consecutive games in which such player appears and is not determined by his club’s 
games. 
(c) CONSECUTIVE-GAME PLAYING STREAK.  A consecutive-game playing 
streak shall be extended if a player plays one half-inning on defense or if the player 
completes a time at bat by reaching base or being put out.  A pinch-running 
appearance only shall not extend the streak.  If a player is ejected from a game by an 
umpire before such player can comply with the requirements of this Rule 10.23(c), 
such player’s streak shall continue. 
(d) SUSPENDED GAMES.  For the purpose of this Rule 10.23, all performances in the 
completion of a suspended game shall be considered as occurring on the original 
date of the game. Index 
117 
Index 
Rules 1.00 through 9.00 
Note: For any items not listed and for additional information, see alphabetized entries of 
Rule 2.00.
Abandoning Effort to Run Bases—6.08, 6.09(b) Comment, 7.08(a)(2), 7.08(j), 7.10(c). 
Accident to Player or Umpire—5.10(c, h). 
Ambidextrous Pitcher—8.01(f).
Apparent Fourth Out—7.10. 
Appeals—6.07, 7.04(d) Note, 7.05(i) Comment, 7.08(d, j-k), 7.10, 9.02(c). 
Apparent Fourth Out—7.10(d). 
Awarded Bases— 
Appeal 7.10; 
 Overthrown ball, by infielder 7.05(g); 
 Overthrown ball, by pitcher from pitcher’s plate 7.05(h), 7.05(g-i), 8.01(e); 
Ground rules 3.13; 
 Obstruction 7.06(a) Comment; 
Spectator interference 3.16 Comment. 
Balk—4.03(a), 7.07, and various violations in Rule 8.00; 
Penalty 5.09(c), 7.04(a), 8.05. 
Base—1.04, 1.06, 2.00; 
Dislodged 7.08(c) Approved Rulings 1 and 2. 
Baseball—1.09; 
Defaced 3.02, 8.02(a); 
 Official game balls 3.01(c-e).
Base Coaches—4.05; 
 Helmets 1.16(e); 
Interference 3.15, 5.08, 7.09(h-i), 7.11; 
 Restrictions 3.17, 4.06(a). 
Bat—1.10; 
 Altered 6.06(d). 
Bat Boy/Girl—1.16(f), 3.15, 3.17.
Batter/Batter-Runner— 
 Backswing strikes catcher 6.06(c); 
Fails to advance to first base 6.08, 6.09(b); 
 Hit by pitch 5.09(a), 6.05(f), 6.08(b), 2.00 (Ball, Strike); 
 Interference by 6.05(g-i, k), 6.06(c), 7.08(g), 7.09; Index 
118 
 Interference with 6.08(c), 7.04(d); 
 Position in batter’s box 2.00, 6.02, 6.03, 6.06; 
 Struck by batted ball 5.09(f), 6.05(g), 7.09(k). 
Batter’s Box—1.04, 2.00, 6.02, 6.03, 6.06. 
Batting Order—3.03, 3.04, 3.05, 3.06, 3.07, 3.08, 4.01, 4.04, 6.01, 9.04(a)(8). 
Batting Out of Order—6.07. 
Bench/Dugout—1.08, 2.00; 
Catch/Play attempts 2.00 (“Catch” Comment), 5.10(f), 6.05(a) Comment, 7.04(c), 7.11; 
Equipment 3.14;  
 Live ball deflected into 7.05(h); 
 Occupants 3.06 Comment, 3.17, 4.06, 4.07, 4.08, 9.05(c). 
Bounced Pitch—2.00 (Ball).
Catch—2.00, 6.05(a-b).
Catcher— 
Interference by 2.00 (Interference (b)), 6.08(c), 7.04(d), 7.07; 
 Interference with 2.00 (Interference (c)), 5.09(b), 6.06(c), 7.08(g); 
Pitch lodges in equipment 5.09(g), 7.05(i); 
 Position, 4.03. 
Catcher’s Box—1.04 (Diagram 2), 2.00, 4.03(a), 8.05(l). 
Checked Swing—9.02(c) Comment. 
Coach—2.00, 2.00 (Manager (b)), 3.15 Comment, 4.05, 5.08, 7.09 (h-i), 7.11. 
Curfew—4.12(a)(1), 4.12(a) Note.
Darkness/Field Lights—4.12(a)(4), 4.12(a) Note, 4.14, 5.10(a-b).
Dead Ball (“Time”) and Resuming Play—3.12, 5.02, 5.10, 5.11, 6.02(b) Comment.
Defacing, Discoloring Baseball—3.02, 8.02(a). 
Delay of Game— 
By batter 6.02(c-d); 
By pitcher 6.02(b) Comment, 8.02(c), 8.04, 8.05(h); 
 Forfeit for delay 4.15. 
Designated Hitter—6.10. 
Detached Equipment—7.04(e), 7.05(a-e). 
Disabled List Players—3.17 Comment.
Dislodged Base—7.08(c) Approved Rulings 1 and 2. 
Doubleheader—4.13. 
Dropped Third Strike—2.00 (Ball), 5.09(g) Comment, 6.05(b-d, f, j, n), 6.09(b), 7.09(a). 
Dugout—see Bench.
Ejection—4.06, 4.07, 4.08, 9.01, 9.02, 9.05. Index 
119 
Equipment— 
Base 1.06; 
Baseball 1.09; 
 Bat 1.10; 
 Bench 1.08; 
 Commercialization 1.17; 
 Glove/Mitt 1.12, 1.13, 1.14, 1.15;  
 Helmet 1.16; 
 Home base 1.05; 
 Pitcher’s plate 1.04, 1.07; 
 Uniforms 1.11. 
Equipment Illegally Touches Live Ball—7.04(e), 7.05(a-e).  
Fair Ball—2.00; 
Bounces out of play 6.09(e-g), 7.05(f); 
 Deflected out of play 6.09(g-h), 7.05(a, f); 
 Intentionally dropped 6.05(l); 
 Touches runner or umpire 5.09(f) Comment, 6.08(d), 6.09(c), 7.04(b), 7.08(f), 7.09(k). 
Fielder— 
 Falls out of play 5.10(f), 7.04(c); 
 Positioning on Field of Play 4.03; 
 Sleeves 1.11(c); 
 Throws glove at ball (detached equipment) 7.04(e), 7.05(a-e). 
Fielder’s Choice—2.00, 10.12(f)(2). 
Force Play/Force Out—2.00, 7.08(e); 
Reinstated 7.08(e).
Forfeit—3.11, 3.18, 4.15, 4.16, 4.17, 9.04(a)(6), 10.03(e). 
Foul Ball—2.00, 5.09(e), 6.05(h).
Foul Tip—2.00, 5.09(g), 6.05(b) Comment, 7.08(d) Comment. 
Fraternization—3.09.
Glove/Mitt—1.12, 1.13, 1.14, 1.15; 
Illegally touches live ball 7.05(a, c, e). 
Ground Rules—3.13, 9.04(a)(9). 
Groundskeepers—3.11, 4.01(e), 4.16. 
Helmet—1.16, 6.05(h) Comment.
Home Run—6.09(d), 7.05(a).  
Illegal Bat—1.10, 6.06(d). 
Illegal Pitch—2.00 (Illegal Pitch and Quick Return), 8.01(b) Comment, 8.01(d), 8.05(e). 
Illegally Batted Ball—5.09(d), 6.06(a). Index 
120 
Infield Fly—2.00, 6.05(e, l), 7.08(f) Exception. 
Intentionally Dropped Ball—6.05(l). 
Intentional Pitch at Batter—8.02(d). 
Interference—
Authorized on-field personnel 3.15; 
Backswing, 6.06(c) Comment; 
 Batter’s 6.05(h), 6.06(c), 7.08(g), 7.09(c); 
 Catcher’s 6.08(c), 7.04(d), 7.07; 
 Coach’s 3.15 Comment, 5.08, 7.09(h); 
 Defensive 2.00, 3.15, 6.08(c), 7.04(d), 7.07; 
Intentional (Double Play) 7.09(f), 6.05(m), 7.08(b) Comment; 
 Offensive 2.00, 3.15, 5.09(f-g), 6.05(h-i, m-n-o), 6.06(c), 6.08(d), 7.08(b, f-g, l), 7.09, 
7.11; 
 Spectator 2.00 (Interference(d)), 3.16; 
 Umpire 2.00, 5.09(b, f), 6.08(d); 
 see also Base Coaches, Batter and Catcher.  
League President—2.00, 1.11(i), 2.00 (Manager), 3.01(c), 4.12(b)(4), 4.13(c); 
Illegal bat 6.06(d); 
 Pitching violations 8.02(a), 8.02(d); 
 Protest 4.18, 4.19; 
 Umpires 9.01(a), 9.04(c), 9.05.
Light Failure—4.12(a-b), 5.10(b). 
Lineup Cards—4.01, 6.10(b)(1), 6.10(b)(11).
Missed Base or Home Plate—7.05(i) Comment, 7.08(k), 7.10(b, d); 
see also Appeals and Runner (Touch requirements). 
Obstruction—2.00, 7.06, 7.09(j) Comment; 
By spectators 4.09(b). 
Official Scorer—3.03, 9.04(a)(8); 
see also Rule 10.00. 
Overrunning/Oversliding— 
First base, 7.08(c, j), 7.10(c); 
Home plate 7.08(k), 7.10(d). 
Pinch Hitter/Runner—see Substitutions.
Pitch— 
Ball 2.00; 
Goes out of play 7.05(h);  
 Intentionally thrown at batter 8.02(d);  
 Lodges in catcher’s or umpire’s equipment 5.09(g), 7.05(i).Index 
121 
 Strike 2.00; 
 Touches batter 5.09(a), 6.05(f), 6.08(b), 2.00 (Ball, Strike); 
 Touches runner attempting to score 5.09(h), 6.05(h). 
Pitcher— 
Altered baseball 8.02(a)(6);  
 Ambidextrous 8.01(f); 
Becomes infielder 8.01(e);  
 Injured 3.03 Comment, 3.05(a-b), 8.01(f), 8.03; 
 Intentionally pitches at batter 8.02(d);  
 Legal position 8.01(a-b); 
 Mouth, goes to on mound 8.02(a)(1); 
 Pitches visits by manager or coach 8.06; 
 Pivot foot 2.00, 8.01(a-b, e);  
 Possesses foreign object or substance 8.02(b);  
 Preparatory pitches 8.03, 8.06 Comment; 
 Sleeves 1.11(c); 
 Throws out of play from pitcher’s plate 7.05(h). 
Pitcher’s Plate—1.04, 1.07.
Player or Umpire Incapacitated—5.10(c, h). 
Player Restrictions— 
Barred from stands 3.09; 
Confined to bench 3.17;  
 Fraternizing 3.09; 
 General conduct 3.06 Comment, 4.06, 4.07, 4.08. 
Playing Field—1.04. 
Police Protection—3.18. 
Postponement Responsibility—3.10. 
Pregame Conference—4.01. 
Protested Game—4.19, 9.02(b). 
Quick Pitch—see Illegal Pitch.
Rain Delays—3.10(c).
Regulation Game—1.03, 4.10 , 4.11; 
7-inning Game 4.10(a) Exception. 
Rosin Bag—3.01(f), 8.02(a).
Runner— 
Abandons effort to run bases 6.08, 6.09(b) Comment, 7.08(a)(2), 7.08(j), 7.10(c); 
Entitled to base 7.01, 7.03, 7.08(b) Comment; 
Injured 5.10(c)(1) Index 
122 
Interferes after scoring 7.09(e); 
Leaves baseline to avoid tag 7.08(a)(1); 
 Passes lead runner 7.08(h); 
 Retouch (tag up) requirements 2.00, 7.08(d), 7.10(a), 2.00 (Infield Fly), 5.09(e), 7.05(i) 
Comment; 
 Return prohibited 5.06 Comment, 7.01 Comment, 7.10(b); 
 Reverse base-running prohibited 7.08(i); 
 Struck by batted ball (after passing fielder) 5.09(f), 7.09(k); 
 Touch requirements 7.02, 7.08(c) Approved Ruling 2; 
 Touched by pitched ball 5.09(h); 6.05(n); 
 see also Batter-Runner. 
Score of Game—4.11. 
Scoring Rules (Official Scorer)—Rule 10.00. 
Scoring Runs—4.09, 5.06, 6.05(n), 7.04(b) Comment, 7.07, 7.08(g), 7.10 Comment, 7.12; 
“Fourth Out” Appeal 7.10. 
Set Position—8.01(b).
Spectators—3.09, 3.13, 3.15, 3.18, 4.06(a)(1-2), 5.10(f), 7.04(c), 9.01(e)(2); 
Interference 2.00 (Interference (d)), 3.16.
Strike/Strike Zone—2.00, 6.08(b). 
Substitutions—3.03 – 3.08, 4.04. 
Suspended Game—4.12, 4.10(d); 
NAPBL rule (optional) 4.12(a)(7-9). 
Tag—2.00, 7.08(c, e); 
After awarded base (live ball) 6.08(a), 7.04(b);  
 After missed home plate 7.08(k) Comment, 7.10 Comment;  
 After overrunning first base 7.08(c, j), 7.10(c); 
 While two runners touch same base 7.03. 
Tagging Up (Retouch)—2.00 (Infield Fly, Retouch), 5.09(e), 7.05(i) Comment, 7.08(d), 
7.10(a).
Third Strike Situations—2.00 (Ball), 5.09(g) Comment, 6.05(b-d, f, j, n), 6.09(b), 7.09(a). 
Three-Foot Lane—1.04, 6.05(k). 
Throw—2.00 (Pitch–Comment and Throw); 
Pitcher 8.01(a-c, e), 8.02(c), 8.05(a-d, j), Approved Ruling, Comment (b); 
 Interference with 5.08, 5.09(b), 6.05(h, k, m), 6.06(c), 7.05(e), 7.08(b), 7.09(j), 7.11.  
Thrown Ball Out of Play—3.01(e) Comment, 7.05(g-i), 8.01(e); 
Appeal, during 7.10;  
 Ground rules 3.13; Index 
123 
 Obstruction, during 7.06(a) Comment; 
 Spectator interference 3.16 Comment. 
Tie Game—2.00, 4.10(d), 4.12.
Time Limits—4.12(a)(2), 4.12(a) Note, 9.04(a)(7). 
Trips to the Mound—8.06.
Umpire—9.00; 
Changing call after consultation 9.02(c), 9.02(c) Comment; 
Controls ground crew 3.11; 
 Field lights 4.14, 5.10(a-b); 
 Incapacitated 5.10(c, h); 
 Judge of playing conditions 3.10(b-c), 4.01(d), 5.10(a); 
 Pregame duties 3.01; 
 Touched by pitch or throw 5.08, 5.09(g), 6.05(b) Comment, 7.05(i); 
 Written reports to League President 4.18, 9.05. 
Uniforms—1.11, 1.17. 
Visit of Manager to Pitcher—8.06.
Weather and Playing Conditions—3.10, 3.13, 4.01(d), 4.12(a), 4.13(d), 5.10(a), 6.02(b) 
 Comment, 8.02(a)(1); 
Weather takes precedence 4.12(a) Note. 
Windup Position—8.01(a).  In baseball, you see something new every 
game. Whether it’s a bizarre play or a subtle 
nuance of the national pastime, there’s 
only one place to turn for an accurate 
interpretation: the Of cial Baseball Rules, 
published by the Major League Baseball 
Of ce of the Commissioner. For players, 
coaches and veteran umpires, this updated 
2011 edition of the Of cial Baseball Rules 
serves as the  nal word for settling any and 
all on- eld disputes.
OFFICIAL
RULES
2011 
EDITION 